                                                                                                               London




NOV
          Sociology in Action
10        For A-level students
2025
          This outstanding enrichment day for enthusiastic A-level Sociology students is back in London this autumn!
          In a cutting-edge and inspiring programme, leading sociologists, academics and media personalities will
          address a range of challenging and powerful questions on how society functions, the factors which
          influence our choices and how we experience life. Presenting a unique opportunity for students to immerse
          themselves in today’s big sociological issues, this day will take students beyond their classroom experience,
          and leave them buzzing with new ideas and fresh perspectives.

          This exciting day will include an invaluable lunchtime exam session to propel students to even greater
          success. Join us for an inspirational, immersive and interactive day of sociology!


          • Feminism, gender and society                        • Seven typical British children today – injustice
                                                                and hope
          • Race and education in today’s world                 • Representations of Female Crime: Reflections
                                                                from a Decade in the Field
          • Celebrity culture and the media



                   Emmanuel Centre, London,                                     Venue: £25.50 +VAT *
                   London,
                                                                                Plus one COMPLIMENTARY staff ticket per 10
                   SW1P 3DW
                                                                                students.

                                                                                *VAT may be reclaimable. Please check with your
                                                                                finance department




   Education in Action is the leading provider of inspirational, informative, Education in Action
                        study days for A-level, IB, BTEC and GCSE students.
                                       Award-winning, world-class speakers
                                               Cutting-edge content
                                   Thought-provoking demos and presentations
                                       Examination hints, tips and guidance
                                       Modestly priced to offer access to all
                             Complimentary staff ticket for every 10 students booked
                         Bookings can be amended up to 28 days before the event day
  NOV
   10
   2025


Feminism, gender and society /
Ann Oakley – Sociologist and Writer
              Award-winning sociologist and writer Professor Ann Oakley will            Ann Oakley is a writer and a sociologist. She is best
                                                                                        known for her work on sex, gender and social science and
              present a fascinating session on feminism and the impact of gender
                                                                                        has written numerous academic works and many novels.
              within the family and society. There will be plenty of opportunity        She is founder-director of and Professor of Sociology and
              for audience questions.                                                   Social Policy at the Social Science Research Unit, UCL
                                                                                        Social Research Institute. In 2011 the British Sociological
                                                                                        Association awarded her one of their first Lifetime
                                                                                        Achievement Awards for her extraordinary contribution to
                                                                                        the history of the development of sociology in Britain.

Seven typical British children today – injustice and hope /
Danny Dorling – University of Oxford
              If we found seven typical children to represent today’s UK, who           Danny Dorling is a sociologist, social geographer and the
                                                                                        Halford Mackinder Professor of Geography at Oxford
              would they be and what would their stories reveal? Amid a cost-of-
                                                                                        University. He has co-authored dozens of books and
              living crisis, this could be a depressing story, when even the best off   journals on social inequalities. His work concerns housing,
              is disadvantaged. Yet aspirations endure and there are many signs         health, employment, education and poverty and his most
              that things could be improving. Professor Dorling explores what           recent book, Seven Children, was published in 2024.
              kinds of lives British children are living between the extremes.
Race and education in today’s world /
Jason Arday – University of Cambridge
              The session will focus on the importance of Sociology in an               Jason Arday FRSA is a British sociologist, writer and
                                                                                        fundraiser best known for his research on race and racism,
              increasingly politically divisive world, and how intersectional
                                                                                        inequality and education. In March 2023 he was appointed
              thinking informs this. Significantly, the session will centre on race     Professor of Sociology of Education at Cambridge
              and racism in society and how this impacts our education system.          University, the youngest black professor ever appointed at
                                                                                        the university. He is a Trustee of the Runnymede Trust, the
                                                                                        UK’s leading Race Equality Thinktank, and the British
                                                                                        Sociological Association.

Representations of Female Crime: Reflections from a Decade in the Field /
Gemma Birkett – City St George’s, University of London
              It is easy to see why women who commit serious offences have              Gemma Birkett is a Reader in Criminal Justice at City St
                                                                                        George’s, University of London. Her research focuses on
              immediate news value by virtue of their rarity. Feminist critics in
                                                                                        sentencing and penal policy, with a particular focus on
              particular believe that the media tap into and magnify deep-seated        women in the justice system. She undertakes research and
              public fears about deviant and unruly women, while paying less            consultancy work for several criminal justice charities as
              attention to their male counterparts. This talk will reflect on a         well as for the House of Commons Justice Select
                                                                                        Committee, assisting with its inquiry on rehabilitation and
              decade spent working with and researching women in the criminal
                                                                                        resettlement.
              justice system as well as addressing some of the ‘myths’ versus
              ‘realities’ in this space.
Celebrity culture and the media /
Ellis Cashmore – Sociologist and cultural critic
              Sociologist Ellis Cashmore will explore the evolution of celebrity        Ellis Cashmore is a sociologist, cultural critic and author.
                                                                                        He is currently a visiting professor of sociology at Aston
              culture and the rise of the paparazzi, reality TV, influencers and a
                                                                                        University and has previously lectured at universities in
              new type of media. He will draw on decades of research and some           the USA and Hong Kong. He has published widely on
              recent case studies to unpick and examine the mechanics behind            celebrity culture, the media, racism and sport.
              modern celebrity and what it reveals about our values, desires and
              identity.




                                                         Education in Action
                                               Gilmoora House | 57-61 Mortimer Street | London W1W 8HS
                                                020 3008 6441 | office@educationinaction.org.uk
                                                        www.educationinaction.org.uk
