           BSA ANNUAL CONFERENCE 2026




                                    Abstract Book
                                 Wednesday 8 April 2026


                                                     Table of Contents
WELCOME .............................................................................................................................................. 3
SPONSORS ............................................................................................................................................ 4

IMPORTANT DELEGATE INFORMATION ............................................................................................ 7
PAPER SESSION 1 ................................................................................................................................ 9
BREAKTIME SESSION ........................................................................................................................ 36

PAPER SESSION 2 .............................................................................................................................. 37
PLENARY: JASON ARDAY .................................................................................................................. 70
PAPER SESSION 3 .............................................................................................................................. 71

STREAM PLENARIES ........................................................................................................................ 104
PUBLISHERS’ RECEPTION AND POSTER PRESENTATIONS ...................................................... 110




                                              Abstracts are listed by Paper Session
                                              then alphabetically by Stream name




                                                              2
                                 British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                                  University of Manchester
                                     WELCOME
Welcome to the British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026 at the University of
Manchester. The theme of the 2026 conference is ‘75 Years of Sociology’. Over the past seven and a
half decades, the BSA has played a central role in advancing scholarship, fostering collaboration and
supporting the development of our field. Our annual conference is a significant moment to come
together for reflection and to consider the future directions of our work.
To mark this anniversary, it is a pleasure to announce that Jason Arday, Les Back, and our panellists,
Bandana Purkayastha, Beáta Nagy and Maitrayee Chaudhuri, will address the conference in three
thought-provoking plenaries this year.
In addition to these plenaries, delegates have the opportunity to attend presentations on a wide range
of topics. The conference is organised in streams designed to represent the major areas of research
with which sociologists are engaged. These streams are open to any topic on which colleagues are
currently working, enabling delegates to meet with others who share their interests and explore a variety
of subjects.
The programme also includes a variety of special events, stream plenaries, publishing events and other
sessions to support sociologists across their career stages. This conference offers a rich and
challenging programme and it is hoped that every delegate will find sessions of interest.
A conference of this magnitude and breadth depends on the efforts of many committed individuals.
Significant thanks and gratitude are due to all those who have helped with the organisation of the
conference, particularly the coordinators of the conference streams who read and thought about a
record-breaking number of abstracts.
We are grateful to all the organisers, speakers, chairs, Trustees and attendees who make this
conference so vibrant every year. Your engagement continues the tradition of community collaboration
and intellectual exchange that has defined the BSA since its founding. We hope this conference will
renew inspiration and invigorate our shared commitment to sociological ways of viewing the world for
the next 75 years.




                                                    3
                       British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                        University of Manchester
                                     SPONSORS
We would like to express our appreciation for the support of our sponsors and exhibitors. The Exhibition
Area includes displays from many organisations that offer services and information for conference
delegates. Please take some time between sessions to visit these exhibitors.


Main Conference Sponsor
Sage Publications


                                                  Sage is a global academic publisher of books,
                                                  journals, and library resources with a growing range
                                                  of technologies to enable discovery, access, and
                                                  engagement.


The BSA would like to thank SAGE Publishing for sponsoring some of the free places for the
conference.


Sponsors and Exhibitors
AQA
                                Since 1903, we’ve been designing and delivering fair and inclusive
                                assessment – an essential ingredient for a good education. We set and
                                mark around half of all GCSEs and A-levels, but we’re more than an
                                exam board. As an independent education charity, we reinvest all our
                                income into research and innovation that advance assessment
                                worldwide. We’re focused on fair and inclusive assessment and the
                                positive impact it has on teaching, learning, and society. Visit
                                aqa.org.uk


Bristol University Press
                                                                           Bristol University Press is
                                                                           committed to publishing
                                                                           high-quality social science
                                                                           research that makes a real-
                                                                           world impact.
Join us at the BSA conference to explore our latest books and journals, including the new Creative
Research Methods Journal. Book a meeting with our editor to discuss your publishing projects, including
open access options.
Special offer for BSA attendees: Get your favourite BUP books at 50% off during April! Use code CNF26
at checkout on our website.
Discover more about our Sociology programme here: https://bristoluniversitypress.co.uk/sociology




                                                    4
                       British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                        University of Manchester
                                                                              Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                          Sponsors

De Gruyter Brill
                              De Gruyter Brill is a global publishing leader in the humanities and
                              beyond. Headquartered in Berlin, with its second-largest office in Leiden,
                              De Gruyter Brill publishes over 3,500 books and 800 journals annually,
                              with a strong focus on the humanities and social sciences while covering
                              science, technology, engineering, and mathematics. De Gruyter Brill is
                              a family-owned, independent publisher committed to curating
                              indispensable research that breaks boundaries, builds new bonds, and
                              shapes a better future.


Emerald Publishing
                                              Emerald Publishing is a global publisher committed to
                                              publishing mission led social science research that
                                              tackles key societal challenges aligned with the UN
                                              SDGs. Their Sociology programme focuses on
                                              championing fresh thinking and promoting diverse
                                              voices. Working with thought leaders and rising stars
                                              worldwide to produce monographs, handbooks, short-
form books and series that set the research agenda, Emerald is an exciting home for scholarship that
aims to reach beyond the academy.


Liverpool University Press
                                      Liverpool University Press is the UK’s third oldest university
                                      press, with a distinguished history of publishing exceptional
                                      research since 1899. LUP has rapidly expanded in recent years
                                      to become an award-winning academic publisher that produces
                                      approximately 200 books a year, over 50 journals, and more
                                      than a dozen digital collections across the social sciences,
                                      humanities and earth sciences. In 2025 LUP was selected as
                                      the new publishing partner for the British Academy.


Manchester University Press
                           Our thriving Social Sciences list consistently engages with the most
                           pressing issues of our time. We publish books that influence policy and
                           change the international research landscape. The list is multidisciplinary,
                           producing award-winning academic and trade titles on everything from
                           migration and medicine to the climate crisis and culture wars. Boasting key
                           series on globalisation, racism and resistance, urban transformation and
                           creative ethnography, the list represents the depth and breadth of
                           contemporary social research.



MAXQDA
                                              MAXQDA is a world-leading software package for
                                              qualitative and mixed methods research. Analyze all
                                              kinds of data – from texts to images and audio/video
                                              files, websites, survey responses, and much more.
Developed by and for researchers, MAXQDA is the only leading QDA software that is 100% identical
on Windows and Mac.




                                                   5
                      British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                       University of Manchester
                                                                                   Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                               Sponsors

MDPI
                              MDPI is a leader in the transition to open science by making more research
                              free and accessible to everyone. Over 4.5 million researchers have
                              entrusted us with publishing their scientific discoveries.




Palgrave Macmillan
                                       Palgrave Macmillan publishes award-winning, peer-reviewed
                                       research for academics, professionals, and librarians. Across the
                                       humanities, social sciences, and business, we publish around
                                       2,000 books each year and over 40 journals. Visit palgrave.com
                                       and follow @Palgrave




Polity Wiley
                        Polity is one of the world's leading publishers in sociology and social theory. We
                        publish many of the key scholars in the field and our list has earned a reputation
                        for innovative, cutting-edge publications, as well as strong textbooks.
                        Established in 1984, Polity has grown rapidly into one of the world’s most
                        distinguished independent publishing houses.




Princeton University Press
                                                          Princeton’s sociology list publishes bold and
                                                          original scholarship that betters our understanding
                                                          of compelling social matters. It encompasses
                                                          qualitative and quantitative research in such areas
                                                          as cultural sociology, economic sociology, urban
                                                          sociology, and computational sociology. Featuring
work that is empirically rich, theoretically significant, and methodologically innovative, the list represents
some of the most important contributions to contemporary sociological thought.


Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group
                                                 Routledge is the world's largest academic publisher in the
                                                Humanities and Social Sciences, offering an extensive
                                                portfolio of book and journals that serves scholars,
                                                instructors and professional communities worldwide. We
                                                are proud to publish the Sociological Futures book series
                                                with the BSA, a flagship for new approaches to
                                                sociological issues, debates and ‘the social’ in the 21st
                                                century. Please visit the Routledge stand to browse the
                                                latest titles and to discuss ideas with our editors.




                                                     6
                        British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                         University of Manchester
                  IMPORTANT DELEGATE
                     INFORMATION
Arrival and Registration
We’re expecting a high volume of delegates arriving on Day 1, so the registration area is likely to be
very busy. To help everything run smoothly, please collect your badge promptly on arrival and then step
away from the desk to allow others to register. Feel free to grab some refreshments, explore the venue
or take a moment to familiarise yourself with the programme.
Your badge must be worn at all times for security and meal access. It also indicates whether you’ve
booked for the 75th Social.
Registration will take place in The Drum, University Place:
      Wednesday 8 April          08:00-17:30
      Thursday 9 April           08:30-17:45
      Friday 10 April            08:30-14:00
A cloakroom will be available for luggage, coats, etc throughout the conference in the Drum, University
Place.
      Wednesday 8 April          08:00-20:00
      Thursday 9 April           08:00-19:00
      Friday 10 April            08:00-18:30


Venue Details
Venue address: University Place, 176 Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PL
Directions:
     Interactive map
     Travel by train
     Travel by bus, tram or coach
     Travel by car
     Travel by air
     Travel by bicycle
Virtual Tour of University Place: https://www.conference.manchester.ac.uk/virtual-
tours/universityplace/
Sessions will take place in various rooms at University Place.


Chairing
We are extremely grateful to all those who have agreed to chair one or more sessions. If you find
yourself in a session without a chair, we would be grateful if someone in the audience could volunteer
to take this role. Chairing guidelines will be available in each room and a copy is also available here.




                                                     7
                        British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                         University of Manchester
                                                                                Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                          Important Delegate Information


Meals and Refreshments
Tea and coffee           Throughout the conference         The Drum
Lunch                    12:30-14:00 each day              The Marketplace Restaurant
Vegetarian and vegan options will be available as part of the standard catering provision. If you have
notified us of any other specific dietary requirements, please make these known to the catering staff
when collecting your meals and refreshments.
Your badge must be worn to access refreshments.
No breakfast or evening meals are included in your registration. Manchester offers a wide range of local
dining options nearby.


75th Social
The 75th Social will be held at Whitworth Hall on Thursday 9 April at 19:00. Dress code is smart casual.
This event must be pre-booked, we are unable to take bookings at the conference. If you are
registered, your badge will display a ticket symbol. For any questions, please visit the registration desk.


Publicity and Photography
Share your experience using #britsoc26 on social media!
Please note that professional photographers will be capturing images during the conference. These
may be used by the BSA for marketing and promotional purposes, including in print and digital
platforms.
By attending, you consent to being photographed. If you prefer not to be included, please speak to a
member of the BSA Events team or an official photographer, or contact us after the event at
events@britsoc.org.uk




                                                    8
                       British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                        University of Manchester
                                    PAPER SESSION 1
                                       09:00-10:30




                                             Session Table of Contents
Cities, Mobilities, Place & Space 1 - Room 3.211 ............................................................................. 10
Cities, Mobilities, Place & Space 2 - Room 3.212 ............................................................................. 11
Culture, Media, Sport & Food - Room 3.210 (Special Event) ........................................................... 12
Emerging Themes & Special Events - Room 4.206 .......................................................................... 14

Families & Relationships 1 - Room 4.204 ......................................................................................... 15
Families & Relationships 2 - Room 4.209 ......................................................................................... 17
Families & Relationships 3 - Room 4.211 ......................................................................................... 18

Lifecourse - Room 4.213 ................................................................................................................... 20
Medicine, Health & Illness - Room 3.209 .......................................................................................... 21
Race, Ethnicity & Migration 1 - Room 2.217 ..................................................................................... 22

Race, Ethnicity & Migration 2 - Room 2.218 ..................................................................................... 23
Race, Ethnicity & Migration 3 - Room 2.219 ..................................................................................... 25
Social Divisions / Social Identities 1 - Lecture Theatre A .................................................................. 26

Social Divisions / Social Identities 2 - Room 1.219 ........................................................................... 28
Sociology of Education 1 - Room 2.220 ............................................................................................ 30
Sociology of Education 2 - Room 3.204 ............................................................................................ 31
Theory - Room 4.205 (Special Event) ............................................................................................... 32
Work, Employment & Economic Life - Room 3.213 .......................................................................... 34




                                                         9
                            British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                             University of Manchester
                                                                                Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                      Paper Session 1
                                                                                          09:00-10:30

Cities, Mobilities, Place & Space 1 - Room 3.211
Capital, Illness and the Seascape: An Ethnographic Exploration of Restitution and Struggle in a
Small, Remote Northern Seaside Town
Edward Hart
(University of Hull)
Many seaside towns share a fate analogous to that of former industrial towns, as expressed in the
relative loss of their intrinsic purpose and the consequent implications for health. Unlike their larger
counterparts, small seaside rural towns are often overlooked as sites of post-modern struggle and
peripheralisation. This paper is based on an ethnographic study of the experiences of working-age
adults living with multiple health conditions in a small, remote northern seaside town, pseudonymously
referred to as Skelsend. Since the 1970s, Skelsend has undergone decades of economic decline,
characterised by the incremental dissolution of its resort life and intrinsic purpose. Typical of many
resorts, its neighbourhoods are measured as significantly socially and economically disadvantaged.
Findings suggest that residents' utilisation of space within Skelsend is related to their access to social
and economic capital, whilst how residents use space largely shapes their perception of Skelsend. For
residents requiring economic opportunities, the spatial redundancy of Skelsend can cultivate
dispositional schemas of despondency. Individual spatial immobility, resulting from illness, dependence
on bonded social capital, and precarious access to financial capital, intensifies their reliance on a town
they perceive as being in decline. However, for many residents who have relocated to Skelsend whilst
living with illness, especially those who are both economically secure and voluntarily inactive, the
conditions of spatial redundancy are experienced as a sanctuary and integral to their restitution in the
face of illness and trauma. This differential experience gives rise to tensions between competing needs
within the town’s social space.


From Ironopolis to Socceropolis: How Intergenerational Football-Fan Communities Construct
the Place-identities of Post-industrial English Towns
Adam Dinsmore, Mark Turner
(Manchester Metropolitan University)
Football is a central component of place-identity in post-industrial England. Where the wealth and
affluence of the nation’s entrepreneurial cities have been integrated into the global economy, a lack of
viable post-industrial futures has harmed the self-esteem of places said to have been ‘left behind’ by
neoliberal development. Deindustrialised regions have thus seen years of disinvestment and occasional
flirtations with reactionary politics. In England’s ‘Red Wall,’ industrial decline preceded widespread
closures of high street shops, public houses, local markets, and their attendant social and leisure
cultures. Amidst this sustained loss of social capital, the local football club—created by local people—
is often the sole surviving marker of a town’s ancestral identity. Often dismissed as inward-looking or
chauvinistic, this paper asks why football cultures have become unparallelled sources of local pride in
England’s former industrial communities—and the implications for working class politics. Drawing on
interviews and ethnographic fieldwork with fan communities in former cotton- (Blackburn) and steel-
making towns (Middlesbrough), we examine the intergenerational practices, ideas, and modes of
cultural transmission through which they construct and maintain their twenty-first century place-
identities. Our findings represent a grassroots critique of the Starmer government’s Pride-in-Place
agenda, and any progressive politics hoping to represent post-industrial working classes in England
and beyond.




                                                   10
                       British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                        University of Manchester
                                                                                 Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                       Paper Session 1
                                                                                           09:00-10:30

Cities, Mobilities, Place & Space 2 - Room 3.212
Buzzes and Break-work: How Coffee Matters in the Times and Spaces of Contemporary
Academia
Katherine Quinn
(Cardiff University)
What work does the ‘break’ do? While classic studies of time, employment and workplace culture – from
Roy’s Banana Time (1959) to Zerubavel’s Hidden Rhythms (1985) - stress the break as work vacation,
increasingly, breaks signal more of a shift than an arrest in work. This break-work is particularly potent
in the fluctuating, fluid, and rhythmically multi-layered spaces of contemporary academia. Here, the
temporal dynamics of ‘projectification’ increasingly coincide with architectural trends towards open-plan,
hot-desk office space. It is in this context that coffee and coffee shops are put to diverse and sometimes
surprising forms of break-work by university workers. Drawing on ethnographic observations at a UKHE
research park – one deliberately designed with low levels of individual sensory control and high levels
of open-plan work arrangements – this paper describes the work of the break. I focus on several
temporal affects of break-work: buzz (where coffee is used to support temporal affects of ‘leisured
purpose’ and futurity), boundaries (where time-shelters are created through coffee conventions), and
breaks (where coffee is used to break-with professional and temporal expectations). The paper
contends that the material, sensory, and spatial capacities of coffee affords important and diverse
practices to work with and against the unruly spaces and rhythms of contemporary HE. Attending to
coffee as a lively, sensory cultural object rather than merely a throughway to considering class is
important for understanding how individuals materialise temporality.


Institutional Space: Order Construction of Interpersonal Interaction in Urban Café: Field Work
Based on Urban Cafes in Beijing, China
Shaohua Le
(Hong Kong Polytechnic University)
The coffee shop spaces that continue to emerge on urban streets are increasingly becoming an integral
part of contemporary citizens' daily lives. In the face of the trend of a return to spatial sociology, this
paper re-examines the significance of urban coffee shops from the perspectives of space and order.
After reviewing the attributes of coffee shops as public spaces, class differentiation and identity
recognition, this study continues to interpret the theory of coffee shops as "third spaces", further
exploring the process of order construction in this inclusive space from a micro-level, and from a
structural dynamic perspective, investigates the order and culture of interpersonal interaction in urban
coffee shops. This study employs a qualitative research paradigm, collecting data through field
observation, participant observation, and in-depth interviews. The analysis of research materials
reveals that coffee shop spaces are inclusive environments that extend beyond "third spaces".
Structured spatial layouts and dynamic subject actions expand the spatial functions of coffee shops. At
the same time, spaces that contain multiple fields involve the interweaving of multiple spatial orders,
and coffee shops present a restrictive institutional space whose spatial system is generated and
reproduced through subject actions. This paper argues that spatial order, as a structural force, and the
spatial agency of social actors jointly constitute a diverse and balanced perspective for explaining
interpersonal interaction in contemporary urban coffee shops.


Cafés as Sites of Distinction: Urban Aspirations and Boundary-Making in Hyderabad, India
Vinathi Gurijala
(Graduate Institute of International and Development Studies)
Scholars have demonstrated that cafés are venues of sociality where everyday boundaries are
negotiated through the labour of service staff (Manzo, 2015; Ott, 2020). Literature on elites, meanwhile,
has highlighted how boundaries are constructed through consumption practices, with recent work
focusing on how elites experience privilege rather than simply protect it (Sherman, 2015). However,
literature on emerging café spaces has been focused on Global North contexts and pays little attention

                                                   11
                       British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                        University of Manchester
                                                                                  Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                        Paper Session 1
                                                                                            09:00-10:30
to boundary-making by patrons and spatial positioning. This paper examines how these dynamics
unfold in a Global South context where caste and gender shape both consumption and labour.
Situating cafés within broader debates on elites, urban sociology, and labour, I argue that cafés in
Hyderabad function as carefully curated and co-produced urban sites where elites enact and reproduce
distinction, illuminating the interplay of aspiration, inequality, and everyday boundary-making in
contemporary Indian cities. This paper argues that cafés are elite spaces, produced through everyday
practices of boundary-making by consumers, workers and founders of these spaces. Emerging in tightly
concentrated café clusters, these sites have become central to urban aspiration and social distinction
in recent years.
Drawing on six months of ethnographic fieldwork and qualitative interviews, I find that distinctions are
produced through three key practices. First, language functions as a marker of exclusivity, with English
selectively deployed to align with elite patrons. Second, invisible labour emerges as consumers prefer
minimal interaction, reinforced by QR-code menus. Third, spatial positioning distinguishes cafés based
on niche premium or mass premium clientele.



Culture, Media, Sport & Food - Room 3.210
Special Event
Connecting Charity, Power, and Care: Sociology's Engagement with Charity and Giving
Jon Dean, Katherine Chen Silke Roth, Shoma Choudhury Lahiri, Triona Fitton, Ellie Munro
(Sheffield Hallam University, City University of New York, University of Southampton, St Xavier’s
College, University of Kent, Sheffield Hallam University)
Across societies, charity has a long, contentious history. Defined as the voluntary giving of help, typically
in the form of money or volunteering to those in need, and the formal organisations which coordinate
such help, the multifaceted presence of charity manifests beliefs about how resources should be
distributed and who should benefit. These beliefs shape charitable forms and relations that connect
various people and groups. Most people do something charitable most days: it is a vital important social
process.
Until recently however, there has been an under-appreciation of the value of sociological and critical
thinking in mainstream studies of charity and giving. Non-profit studies journals have generally seen a
‘dampening of critical work over time’, and a ‘conservatism’ resulting from a preference for more
‘mainstream (positivistic) models of social science’ (Coule et al., 2022: 478). However, inspired by an
increasing focus on social inequalities, and the extent to which charity may be reinforcing rather than
challenging these, there has been a growing application of sociological and critical theory to charity and
non-profit sector research (e.g. Eikenberry et al., 2024; Dean and Wiley, 2021; Coule et al., 2022;
Mirabella et a., 2024). This ‘critical turn’ seeks to examine the political, systemic and structural issues
that may be shaping charitable organisations and behaviours, and ‘reveal the most profoundly buried
structures’ (Bourdieu, 1996: 1) of the non-profit world.
Despite the outstanding work that has been done using the tools and ideas of sociology, charity and
giving studies rarely filters through to general conversations in sociology. The ‘sociology of charity’
barely registers against ‘the sociology of education’ or ‘the sociology of work’, two commensurate areas
of social life. Charity studies as an academic field has been concentrated in the public administration,
business and organisation studies, and social policy fields, sectioned off in topic-specific research
groups, rather than ‘mainstream’ sociology: the sociological character of charity and of being charitable
are underrepresented in mainstream sociology journals and conferences. For example, Bourdieu’s work
on the gift and symbolic capital does not have anywhere near as much attention as his work on
education, work, culture, or reproduction. The contribution of research into charity and how it
promulgates inequality has been under-recognised by the wider discipline.
This panel will include an introduction and three papers drawn from the forthcoming volume ‘Connecting
Charity, Power and Care: A Critical Sociology’, edited by Jon Dean and Katherine Chen, to be published
by Routledge as part of the BSA Sociological Futures series. It seeks to kick-start a conversation about

                                                    12
                        British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                         University of Manchester
                                                                                 Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                       Paper Session 1
                                                                                           09:00-10:30
the history, current presence, and future position of charity as a subject within British (and global)
sociology.


Charity and Citizen Aid in Kolkata during the COVID-19 Pandemic
Silke Roth, Shoma Choundhury Lahiri
(University of Southampton)
This presentation examines voluntary engagement in contemporary India which is shaped both by
historical and religious traditions as well as contemporary neoliberalism. It focuses on charity, citizen
aid, and mutual aid in Kolkata, India, during the COVID-19 pandemic. We show that while charitable
giving and volunteering are underpinned by, and perpetuate, inequality, service provision through
charitable acts and citizen aid can also be linked to political action and mutual aid which challenge
inequality. During the COVID-19 pandemic, needs were diverse and far-reaching (including food,
medicine, and the performance of last rites to dying people). In this time, citizen aid and other aid-
providing initiatives filled gaps left by federal and local governments. Our research draws on literature
on charities, social movements, and mutual aid to map varieties of charitable giving in Kolkata. After
giving a short overview of volunteering and charitable giving in India in a historical perspective we turn
to citizen aid provided during the COVID-19 pandemic. Our qualitative data, which was collected by
Choudhury Lahiri in Kolkata during the pandemic, suggests that citizen aid centered the provision of
care, and disrupted hierarchical forms of charity through horizontal forms of organising.


Consumption for Good, or Good for Consumption? A Critical Sociology of the UK Charity Shop
Triona Fitton
(University of Kent)
This presentation examines the charity shop as a complex, often overlooked example of how people
engage with charity on both a local and global level. It examines the historical evolution of charity shops
in the UK and how they developed alongside global socioeconomic change, highlighting the various
complexities inherent in their coalescence of consumer culture and charitable action. The research
argues that the ethos of ‘consumption for good’ that surrounds charity shops obscures and stymies
opportunities for global systemic change. Drawing on data from charity reports and academic literature,
it considers how charity shops are ‘good for consumption’, because they offer a handy conduit for ethical
disposal, rejuvenation, and recycling in an era of over-consumption. What emerges is a critical analysis
of the ambivalent role charity shops have played in extending the contradictions and harms of capitalism
and neo-colonialism.


Historicising Voluntary Action
Ellie Munro
(Sheffield Hallam University)
This presentation explores how historical study of voluntary action enriches and is enriched by social
theory. It explores voluntary action through the lens of strategic action field theory (Fligstein and
McAdam, 2012). I use archival research from a philanthropy archive in Birmingham, England, to explore
voluntary action from 1965-2010, with a focus on how self-described ‘grassroots’ organisations present
their efforts and challengers to a funder, through the lens of Fligstein and McAdam’s (2012) strategic
action field theory (SAF). SAF theory can help researchers understand and explain change over time
because of lies in its focus on field-based actor interactions, how norms are established, challenged
and reformed through discursive processes, and how actors react to external pressures and shocks. In
this study, it helped to bring to the fore a history that was not about the national policy story, and not
about individual organisations or leaders, but about the local-level field, where these organisations had
most of their interactions, and the local field’s collective identity and how it was formed through ideas,
values and meaning-making activity. The theory emphasises the agency and power of voluntary and
community organisations in shaping and reshaping their own field.




                                                   13
                       British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                        University of Manchester
                                                                                 Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                       Paper Session 1
                                                                                           09:00-10:30

Emerging Themes & Special Events -
Room 4.206
Storytelling as Resistance: Activist Narratives, Trauma and Civic Resilience in Tunisia
Tesnim Chirchi
(Ibn Haldun University)
Democracy requires continuous civic advocacy and discursive ownership of what democracy means in
practice. In Tunisia, since 25 July 2021, pro-democracy activists have confronted imprisonment,
intimidation, and legal and social pressures intended to suppress dissent — dynamics that both
demobilize and traumatize participants. This paper investigates how Tunisian civil-society actors use
storytelling to sustain hope and reframe collective experience into resources for democratic resilience.
I argue that storytelling functions simultaneously as (1) a coping mechanism for trauma and affective
exhaustion produced by repression, and (2) a strategic form of framing and counternarrative that
contests authoritarian discourse and regenerates democratic imaginaries. Drawing on 30 semi-
structured interviews with Tunisian activists conducted between February and September 2024, I show
how narratives shift the register from victimization to agency—documenting learning, local
achievements, and concrete practices of inclusion (disability rights, women’s empowerment, public-
health initiatives, local governance work).
The paper dialogues with literature on framing and social movements (framing theory, narrative
studies), scholarship on repression and emotions, and debates on cultural trauma and necropolitics. It
shows that activist narratives do political work: they (re)construct collective identity, produce moral
frames, and transform traumatic memory into mobilizing stories (Polletta; Snow & Benford; Pearlman;
Alexander; Mbembe). The Tunisian case thus illustrates how storytelling can both heal and politicize —
sustaining mobilization under repression and opening imaginative pathways to democratic renewal. The
paper concludes by reflecting on implications for research on post-authoritarian transitions and on the
role of culture and narrative in sustaining democracy.


Feeling Research Culture: An Emotion Perspective on Researcher Identity
Lara Abel, Allison Beggs, Luisa Ciampi, Mollie Etheridge, Molly Smith, Becky Ioppolo, Steven Wooding
(University of Cambridge)
In conversations about research culture and its transformation, the complexity of the academic system
appears to hinder effective change. To improve researchers’ experience of the research culture they
are placed in, it is essential to understand how individual psycho-social experiences link to
characteristics of the academic system. The perceived value of and control over the academic
environment, as well as the experienced availability of personal, social and institutional resources, are
formative in understanding this relationship.
Our research aims to map structural symbolic interactionism within the academic system, that is,
understand how research culture affects individual researchers’ identities and vice versa. Identity self-
verification processes may elicit emotional responses. We look to understand the landscape of
researchers’ emotional responses elicited through appraisal processes as part of the self-verification
process.
We present insights from our qualitative thematic and affective analysis of 27 letters written by Early
Career Researchers and PIs at the University of Cambridge. These letters were submitted as part of a
survey on researcher’s professional expectations and experiences. We coded achievement emotions,
appraisals of control and value, coping strategies, resources, and themes relating to research culture.
Emotional responses, including emotion expressions such as laughter or crying, were further analysed
in interviews conducted with seven survey participants.
By linking psychological appraisal theories of emotion to sociological identity theory, our work introduces
a novel framework for understanding how researchers perceive their roles within the academic system
and for identifying levers for effective change.
                                                   14
                       British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                        University of Manchester
                                                                                  Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                        Paper Session 1
                                                                                            09:00-10:30
The Legal Cage and the Emotional Loop: Survival and Contained Resistance in India's Border
Security Force
Arpita Mishra
(Jawaharlal Nehru University)
Sociological analyses of border enforcement typically focus on the emotional labor of managing the
'other'. This paper unsettles this focus, asking: what happens when a state’s border guards feel the
greatest threat to their dignity comes not from the border, but from within the state structure they
defend?
Drawing on interviews with India’s Border Security Force (BSF), this paper develops the concept of the
‘legal cage’. We argue the Act’s framework of absolute obedience, inescapable service, and suppressed
dissent creates a recurring emotional loop of ‘managed distress’. This cycle funnels emotional displays
into ‘safe havens’ and is sustained by moral justifications and coping mechanisms. These mechanisms
function as acts of ‘contained resistance’ like private venting or systemic sabotage enabling
psychological survival without challenging the system's authority. Theoretically, this work stretches
concepts of emotional labor to a Global South context, introducing two emergent organisational
rationalities ‘Docility’ (compliance) and ‘Camaraderie’ (peer loyalty) for navigating this cage. This
synthesis of legal text and lived experience offers a new psychosocial tool for analysing state security.
By foregrounding the BSF’s resentment towards the Indian Army, this research contributes a vital
'Security from the South' perspective. It invites the discipline to reconsider the internal dynamics of state
power, revealing how the emotional landscapes of security forces are a rational, painful response to the
laws that govern them. This paper is a space to test these ideas and invite a conversation on the human
cost of the modern security state.



Families & Relationships 1 - Room 4.204
Great-Grandparenthood: Identity and Roles in Four-generation Families
Zuzana Talasova
(Masaryk University)
In this presentation, I explore great-grandparenthood as a largely understudied dimension of four-
generation families in the Czech context. Demographic changes have made the coexistence of four
living generations more common, yet the role of great-grandparents has remained at the margins of
scholarly attention. Drawing on qualitative research that combines narrative interviews and visual family
timelines, I examine how this late-life family role is perceived, experienced, and negotiated across
generations.
My analysis considers how great-grandparenthood contributes to the formation of family identity, how
it connects to the life course perspective, and how it opens new ways of thinking about what it means
to “do family” in the context of ageing and intergenerational relations. At the same time, I highlight the
significance of a four-generation perspective, which offers deeper insight into the dynamics of
contemporary families and their shifting expectations toward the oldest generation.


"If there's ever a time when friends are important, it's when we grow old”: Exploring the Role of
Friendships in Women's Experience of Ageing
Dauphine Maureau
(Université de Lille and Institut national d'études démographiques)
Due to their greater longevity and age differences within couples, while most older men live with a
partner, older women often live alone (Delbès et al., 2006). Encouraged throughout their lives to
prioritise marital and family relationships - bonds that tend to diminish with age due to widowhood and
the increasing independence and geographic distance of children and grandchildren - elderly women
experience profound changes in their social circle as they age. In light of these relational shifts, the role
played, in the daily lives of older women, by non-family yet intimate relationships such as friendships

                                                    15
                        British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                         University of Manchester
                                                                                 Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                       Paper Session 1
                                                                                           09:00-10:30
becomes worth examining (Ermer, Matera, 2020). Unlike family and marital ties, friendships are
characterized by fewer obligations for women and greater autonomy (Roseneil, 2004). Moreover,
friendships between older women involve sharing a dominated social position and common life
experiences which could provide a number of resources and enable forms of mutual aid.
Adopting a dynamic approach, this paper examines how friendships - and their place in elderly women’s
daily lives - evolve through certain transitions related to ageing (such as widowhood or loss of mobility).
It addresses the types of resources circulating within those relationships, highlighting a continuum of
care going from acts of service to emotional support and confidences, as well as forms of
companionship.
This paper is based on a doctoral research conducted through semi-structured interviews with women
from diverse social backgrounds aged 75 to 95 living in urban areas of the Paris region (France).


Caring Across a Lifetime: Parents of Adults with Intellectual Disabilities in Japan
Rinako Someya
(Hosei University and Lund University)
This study explores how ageing parents in Japan sustain long-term caregiving for their adult children
with intellectual disabilities. Japan’s disability movement, which peaked between the 1970s and 1990s,
led to the institutionalisation of community-based living from the 2000s onward. Yet 70.4% of adults
with intellectual disabilities still live with their parents. As they reconcile their own ageing with the
prospect of “only ten more years,” parents continue to shoulder the primary responsibility for care,
relying mainly on weekday welfare services.
Drawing on intensive interviews and long-term fieldwork with parents who have provided care for over
thirty years, this research examines how parents reflect on the necessity of delegating care while
simultaneously persisting in their caregiving. Regardless of how much care is formally outsourced,
parents narrate a constant tension: they acknowledge the need to let go, yet remain deeply engaged
with the everyday, shifting responses of their children.
This paper presents preliminary findings that illuminate why parents persist in caregiving despite
available welfare alternatives. Their narratives suggest that reflective awareness does not always lead
to change, thereby opening up new questions about how care, family, and ageing can be understood
within sociology.


Sibling Relations in Middle Age
Sara Elden
(Malmö University)
Sibling relationships are the longest-lasting family ties most people experience; over 90% of Swedes
aged 45–64 have at least one sibling (Sundström 2023). This paper explores siblingship in middle age
as a key, yet often overlooked, relation of importance to sociological theorising on families. It captures
two defining characteristics: its ebb and flow (Allan 1977; Davies 2023), and the ambivalence between
closeness and conflict. In middle age, sibling ties often re-emerge through the coordination of care for
aging parents and negotiations around inheritance (Sykorova 2024), representing a renewed phase of
interaction. This life stage also invites reflection on earlier periods of both closeness and distance,
making it particularly fruitful for examining how sibling relations challenge taken-for-granted ideas of
“closeness” in family life. As Tanskanen & Danielsbacka (2021: 3) note, “the same factors that tend to
increase contact, emotional closeness and help” between siblings are also “often associated with
conflict and quarrels.” Such ambivalence complicates assumptions in individualisation theories
(Giddens 1992), which often privilege intimate disclosures over background support. As Davies (2023:
79) argues, this widens “the definitions of a close relationship to incorporate conflict and ambivalence.”
Drawing on 60 narratives written by middle-aged siblings in Sweden, collected via a web-based
qualitative survey in collaboration with The Folklife Archive at Lund University, the paper examines how
siblinghood is narrated and experienced across the life course. It makes a theoretical contribution by
rethinking the meaning of closeness in family relations through the lens of sibling ambivalence.


                                                   16
                       British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                        University of Manchester
                                                                               Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                     Paper Session 1
                                                                                         09:00-10:30

Families & Relationships 2 - Room 4.209
Entangled Ambivalence and Sandwich Care
Junko Yamashita
(University of Bristol)
A growing population in economically developed societies are simultaneously providing childcare and
older adult care, or sandwich care. The existing studies reveal that sandwich carers are more physically,
mentally and financially challenged than those providing dyadic care. This paper explores an
understudied area of sandwich care and ambivalence. Ambivalence encompasses the difficulties,
challenges, and range of feelings, including guilt, anger, isolation, sense of duty, fulfilment and many
others that sandwich carers experience. Building on the existing studies on sociological ambivalence,
this paper proposes a new theoretical framework for delineating the entangled structural and relational
webs where sandwich carers’ experiences and negotiations are situated. Our theoretical framework
captures the temporal, socially structured, and policy-contextual properties of ambivalence. I argue that
ambivalence arises from historical and prospective family relationships (temporal) that intersect with
the gendered expectations for parenting and family responsibility of adult social care (socially
structured), which further intersects with care policy and available care services (policy contextual).
How the three qualities of ambivalence influence each other in multiple ways is discussed. While I
illustrate this by drawing on considerable evidence from Japan, we argue that, by integrating ‘non-
western’ case studies, this paper develops the sociological ambivalence theory further, and proposes
a useful theoretical framework attuned to understanding the experience of people providing multiple
care in diverse social and cultural contexts.


Understanding Transracial Adoption: Emotional Labour, Identity and Racial and Cultural
Negotiation
Sweta Rajan-Rankin, Ravinder Barn, Keira Pratt-Boyden
(University of Kent)
While transracial adoption (TRA) has become widespread in western country contexts, theoretical
frameworks underpinning its analysis remain limited; often confined to paradigms of racial/cultural
socialisation and identity theory. These dominant approaches tend to foreground adoptive parental
perspectives, while overlooking the voices of adoptees themselves.
This study challenges such epistemic silences by foregrounding the concept of emotional labour
(Hochschild, 1983) as a critical lens through which we can understand Black adoptees’ experiences of
belonging and exclusion within white families. We conceptualise emotional labour not merely as a
psychological or interpersonal process, but as a deeply racialised and politicised practice. Through a
close reading of selected qualitative texts and autobiographical narratives, we explore how racially
minoritised adoptees engage in both deep and surface acting to navigate the dissonance between their
racial/cultural heritage and the normative expectations of white familial environments.
Adoptees may perform emotional labour to maintain familial harmony and strategically present
themselves in ways that align with dominant racial scripts. Racially minoritised adoptees often find
themselves positioned as symbols of racial progress and multicultural idealism, while simultaneously
being subjects of contestation by both adoptive families and racialised communities. They may
inadvertently become facilitators of cross-racial relations, performing whiteness to gain acceptance
while suppressing aspects of their own cultural identity. Some adoptees, however, reframe their liminal
identities not as a deficit but as a generative space for resistance and self-authorship. This study
provides new insights into identity formation within racialised family structures.




                                                      17
                          British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                           University of Manchester
                                                                                 Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                       Paper Session 1
                                                                                           09:00-10:30
Implicit Care: Exploring Masculine Modes of Care within Contexts of Constraint
Will Mason, Osman Jama, Khaliil Ali
(University of Sheffield, Unity Gym Project)
This paper extends Critical Studies of Men and Masculinities (CSMM) by arguing for enhanced
recognition of the modes of care men practice within contexts of material and gendered constraint.
Drawing on empirical work in the North of England, with 20 second-generation Somali men (aged 18 -
30), we show how contexts of intergenerational trauma, socioeconomic inequality and familial
commitment collectively shape care expectations and priorities, in ways that engender, limit and
transform care. By focusing on the often ‘implicit’, ‘disguised’ or even ‘hidden’ forms of care that
participants recounted and expressed, we centre the importance of care practices that are reparative,
but risk being missed or depreciated with the emerging field of caring masculinities. Overall, we
contribute to developing work in CSMM by (1) emphasising the need to situate care practices within
their geopolitical, socioeconomic and cultural contexts and (2) introducing ‘implicit care’ as a conceptual
resource that might broaden the purview of caring masculinities and sociologies of care more generally.



Families & Relationships 3 - Room 4.211
Living with Problems: Grudging Acts and ‘Lack of Motive’ Talk
Wendy Bottero
(University of Manchester)
Using Mass Observation data, I examine 'grudging acts' ¬—where people grudgingly undertake
unwanted activities —as distinctive problem-situations, where people live with their problems, opting,
grudgingly, to ‘put up with’ unreasonable situations. The Observers rehearsed ‘lack of motive’ talk,
justifying why they begrudged activities but also why it was ‘not worth’ refusing, with insufficient motive
to change tack. Such ‘lack of motive’ talk, in which people abandon envisaged actions because they
think others will not accept their reasons for them, or it is unclear what is situationally acceptable,
demonstrates a neglected dimension of vocabularies of motive (Mills, 1940). Grudging acts illustrate
the mixed motives and mixed emotions through which people get ‘dragged into’ unwanted activities,
connected to uncertainty over the line of acceptability. Grudging acts show the complexities both in
what people will ‘put up with’ but also in how they fall out of social arrangements.


What Do Accounts of Inherited Variants of Dementia Contribute to Understandings of Family
Sociology?
Mel Hall
(Manchester Metropolitan University)
The work of David Morgan (2011) and colleagues at the Morgan Centre has emphasised the importance
of ‘family practices’, fundamentally reshaping studies of families and relationships. This marked a
departure from structural understandings that had long dominated sociological conceptions of family.
These theorisations foreground the relationality and diversity of everyday family life. Our research on
dementia within family contexts (Hall and Sikes, 2018; Hall et al., 2025) has been deeply influenced by
this seminal work, which has helped illuminate how the disease affects interpersonal relationships.
Yet we find ourselves grappling with how relational approaches intersect with the tangible, biological
dimensions of family - particularly in cases involving inherited forms of dementia. Dementia is an
umbrella term for symptoms linked to the deterioration of brain function. Its prevalence is rising,
encompassing both ‘classic’ late-onset Alzheimer’s disease and younger-onset variants. It is a
degenerative, terminal condition, and for some, it carries a genetic component.
This presentation draws on findings from ten biographical interviews conducted in the US and UK, as
part of a study involving adults who have experienced familial dementia attributed to a genetic variant.
Some participants had undergone genetic testing and knew their status - whether they carried the gene
or not - while others had opted against testing or were still deliberating. What insights does this data

                                                   18
                       British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                        University of Manchester
                                                                                  Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                        Paper Session 1
                                                                                            09:00-10:30
offer into the enduring relevance of ‘family practices’? And how might we conceptualise the space for
tangible affinities - those observed and felt by family members - that arise from biological realities?


Care Capital
Duncan Fisher
(University of Sheffield)
Care work, both paid and unpaid, is complex, and through it experiences and transferable resources
are accumulated. The sociological concept ‘capital’ has been applied in different care contexts,
including to elements of caring labour. Chou and Kröger (2014) deploy ‘care capital’ when considering
challenges lone mothers face in combining paid work with unpaid care in Taiwan. They find the limited
external care capital available inhibits women’s labour market participation. For Skeggs’ (1997)
‘emotional cultural capital’ is central to the classed, gendered ‘respectability’ cultivated by working-class
women school leavers taking community care courses in north-west England. Stacey (2011) observes
US homecare aides’ ‘emotional capital’ as often developing from previous experiences as unpaid
carers.
Care work is undervalued and insufficiently recognised, but ‘capital’ presents a possibility for capturing
the existence of care-related skills, knowledge, and awareness. It offers a route to understanding
specific processes shaping who cares and when, and, for example, how certain people become paid
care workers. This paper explains the impetus for interest in care capital, which came from the author’s
empirical study of young adults’ paid care work experiences in north-east England. This interest
developed alongside engagement with the literature introduced above, and the paper summarises
existing conceptualisations of care-related capitals. It points out how these conceptualisations enhance
understanding of caregiving generated resource accumulation, discusses their limitations and risks
attached to using them, and proposes a future research direction on care capital.


From One Hour to the Next: How Solo Mothers of Young Children in England Describe and Make
Sense of Their Everyday Experiences of Work and Care
Victoria Pratt
(University College London)
This empirical paper draws on qualitative research exploring how solo mothers of young children
navigate paid work and caregiving in England. Solo motherhood — facilitated by increased access to
assisted reproductive technologies — is a growing and increasingly diverse family configuration in the
UK and beyond. However, everyday solo mother family life has been little researched to date. In this
study, 35 solo mothers from across England were interviewed online, using a semi-structured approach;
the sample reflected a wide range of income levels, including participants receiving Universal Credit.
The research was informed by a critical realist perspective, which supported a reflexive thematic
analysis attentive to the interplay between individual agency, culture and the underlying social
structures shaping solo mothers’ lives. The findings presented here show how solo mothers
emphasised the meaning and passage of time as they navigated work and care responsibilities across
a typical day. It is argued that this focus on temporality was shaped by the intersection of contemporary
parenting culture (and its emphasis on maternal presence) with structural factors, such as childcare
policy and provision. The paper contributes to sociological debates on care and social reproduction by
illuminating how solo mothers sustain everyday family life amid gendered expectations and limited state
support.




                                                    19
                        British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                         University of Manchester
                                                                                  Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                        Paper Session 1
                                                                                            09:00-10:30

Lifecourse - Room 4.213
Urban-Rural Inequalities in Later Life: Social Participation Mediates the Urban-Rural Divide in
Future Support Expectations
Boxu Wang
(University of Birmingham)
Expectations of future support serve as a key indicator of well-being in later life and are closely
associated with the urban–rural divide. This paper examines the mediating role of social participation
on the relationship between urban–rural residence and older adults’ expectations of future support in
China, a rapidly ageing society with significant urban-rural disparities.
The study draws on panel data (2011–2020) from the China Health and Retirement Longitudinal Study
(CHARLS), focusing on respondents aged 60 and above. Using logistic regression and mediation
models, we investigate whether older adults living in rural areas report lower levels of social participation
compared to their urban counterparts. We expect that these differences may explain variations in future
support expectations. Our models control for key demographic and health variables.
Findings show that older adults, in rural contexts, consistently report lower participation in social
activities compared to older adults living in urban areas. Participation is positively associated with
confidence in future support, and mediation analysis indicates that the effect of urban-rural residence
on expectations of future support is fully explained by social participation. In other words, the mediator
(social participation) is a key mechanism explaining the relationship between urban-rural residence and
future support expectations.
Our results highlight that beyond redistributive measures, policies should also strengthen opportunities
for rural older adults to participate in community and social life. Our paper contributes to research on
ageing inequality by showing how relational mechanisms underpin identity and support gaps in later
life.


How Shifting Social Housing and Health Policies Amplify Late-Life Inequality
Laura Funk, Andrea McDougall
(University of Manitoba)
Politically and economically motivated emphases on ‘aging in place’ need greater attention to the
conditions structuring older people’s access to housing and supports within increasingly neo-liberalized
social welfare states. Drawing on interviews with 44 housing providers, managers, resource workers
and experts in one city in central Canada, we explored how shifting policies in the social housing, health
and community service sectors shape tenants’ access to supports within non-market seniors housing.
Federal and provincial devolution and state divestment from housing responsibility, alongside home
care gaps, put an increasing onus on non-profit organizations of varying capacities. Yet in the absence
of structural incentives to help support tenants to age in place, providers fall back on and reinforce
normative expectations of tenant ‘independence,’ and maintain strong organizational positions around
risk aversion, especially as they face increasing expectations from the public, governments and health
systems. These processes amplify social exclusion and inequalities in older tenants’ abilities to age
with disabilities in particular buildings over time – especially for low-income tenants and those without
family supports. Structural changes that embed social responsibility and human rights considerations
into the purpose and delivery of social housing for older adults could ensure the centrality of both
housing rights and care rights in aging in place policies.


The Political Imaginaries of Ageing: A Conceptual Framework
Anna Shadrina
(University of Liverpool)
Historically, ageing and politics have been studied separately. A small body of empirical work has
examined older people’s political participation, mostly in Western contexts. Inspired by the ‘active

                                                    20
                        British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                         University of Manchester
                                                                               Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                     Paper Session 1
                                                                                         09:00-10:30
ageing’ perspective, this field of research has asked how civic engagement in later life might be
increased, producing typologies of collective action.
The political imaginaries of ageing is a new project that maps dominant and alternative ways of thinking
about global ageing and politics. It departs from the premise that, across historical and geopolitical
settings, ageing has been weaponised by political actors to advance their agendas. The project
investigates how ageing and older people are represented and mobilised in political discourse.
Using Eastern Europe as an initial case study, it asks: what ideas about ageing are deployed in political
narratives? What alliances do these narratives enable or block? How do ideas about ageing intersect
with political temporalities and with the legal and symbolic production of borders and divides? Whose
interests are served when ageing is centred as a political problem?
At this early stage, the project develops a conceptual framework for a comparative research platform
that will map these imaginaries and assess their social and political implications across diverse
contexts.



Medicine, Health & Illness - Room 3.209
A Diagnosing in Waiting: PMDD, Patient Activism and Normative Femininity in France
Hannah Gallagher-Syed
(University of Cambridge)
Premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD), a psychiatric diagnosis for severe premenstrual distress and
dysfunction, has sparked considerable debate (Figert 2017). Does it pathologise women's bodies,
provide an epistemic tool for self-understanding and advocacy, or occupy more ambiguous ground?
And what of the places in which PMDD has not yet materialised as a legitimate diagnosis? This
presentation examines the contested materialisation of PMDD in France, where it has struggled to gain
traction despite its relatively successful trajectory in the US and other English-speaking contexts. I
suggest that PMDD’s complicated French trajectory lies in the tension between an epistemic
incompatibility with French psychiatry and competing demands on femininity that are resolved through
pathologisation.
Since 2020, patient activists organised through TDPM France have lobbied for state and medical
recognition of PMDD. Drawing on interviews with French PMDD activists, I analyse the barriers to
PMDD's French reception. I examine activists' accounts of their motivations, hopes and strategies and
explore how divergent "repertoires of classification" in French medicine and society shape the reception
and legitimacy of this diagnosis (Barnard 2019).
This work offers insight into a psychiatric diagnosis in its "state of becoming"—a moment during which
the diagnosis is malleable, the boundaries of the normal and the pathological are unsettled and the
subjects to whom they apply await or call forth a reconfiguration. By focusing on nascent French
activism around PMDD, I ask why specific social contexts require specific regimes of gendered
pathologisation and contribute to a wider conversation about gendered medicalisation, psychiatrisation
and normative femininity.


A Reproductive Citizenship Approach to Roma & Traveller Health Research
Michaela Nudo
(Trinity College Dublin)
Gypsy, Roma, and Traveller (GRT) women continue to experience a variety of conditions and barriers
impacting their sexual and reproductive health (SRH). In Ireland, ethnocentric maternity services deflect
responsibility for poor outcomes onto Traveller, Roma, and other ethnic minority women, portraying
their cultural practices as the problem, rather than acknowledging systemic shortcomings in care
provision (Reid and Taylor, 2007). The following project, situated within a subset of these outcomes,
seeks to locate Irish Traveller (hereafter, Traveller) women’s Reproductive Citizenship, emphasising
their autonomy and agency in conjunction with the production of health policy and practice.

                                                   21
                       British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                        University of Manchester
                                                                                 Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                       Paper Session 1
                                                                                           09:00-10:30
Reproductive Citizenship, first proposed in 2008 by Turner, was later defined by Smyth (2024), from a
feminist standpoint on abortion research, as “the ongoing, contested process to realize every
individual's freedom to make decisions about their sexual and reproductive lives, and to have those
decisions respected and facilitated,” whereby one’s rights must be realized. Drawing upon academic
scholarship and community-based perspectives, this research seeks to refine an ethical, participatory,
and reflexive framework that aligns with the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (#3: Good
Health and Well-being; #5: Gender Equality). Further contextualizing Traveller women’s rights within
transitional and reproductive justice studies, this project aims to develop a comprehensive and
accessible piece of literature to inform studies of population health, health policy, and health promotion,
where the framework of Reproductive Citizenship may be further applied.



Race, Ethnicity & Migration 1 - Room 2.217
Religious Self-Representation on Social Media: Young African Migrants and the Performance of
Transnational Belonging
Sarah Kazira
(University of Glasgow)
“Why do you never post us on the church’s Instagram?” The question, asked by two young Nigerian
women to a church photographer during a Sunday service in London, was more than a plea for
inclusion, it points to wider negotiations over visibility, representation, and how religious identities are
negotiated across transnational religious and digital spaces. This article examines how young Nigerian
and Zimbabwean migrants in the United Kingdom use social media to self-represent their religious
identities through both curated exhibitions and real-time performances (Hogan, 2010). Drawing on
digital ethnography, including online participant observation of young migrants’ social media practices
on Instagram and TikTok, it shows how everyday digital activities are mobilised as strategies of religious
self-representation directed at multiple, often transnational, audiences as a way for young people to
assert their religious identities and negotiate belonging within transnational religious communities.
The article argues that these religious displays and performances are significant because they reveal
how young migrants use social media to symbolically and performatively enact transnational religious
presence by making sure they remain present and visible. Through this, young migrants show that
transnational religious belonging is not only felt but also has to be performed and mediated to assert
belonging and shape how others perceive their position within the transnational religious communities.


Uncovering Neighbourhood-Embedded Voluntary Non-Profit Action and Capitals in Conditions
of Socioeconomic Challenge and Superdiversity
Gabriella Elgenius
(University of Gothenburg)
This paper analyses the nature of voluntary non-profit (VNP) activity in conditions of socioeconomic
challenge and superdiversity focusing on organisational types, activities and capitals resources utilised
to enable action. We contribute to the round-earth approach (Horton-Smith 2000) while beginning to
further the understanding of civil society in deprived and diverse neighbourhoods (Vertovec, 2007). An
interdisciplinary framework building on scholarship concerning grassroot organisations, resource
mobilisation and community cultural wealth has been utilised alongside a multi-sited cross-country
ethnographic approach to identify different forms of actions including semi-structured interviews with
leaders of 129 organisations in seven neighbourhoods in England and Sweden. We propose a new
framing, the Neighbourhood-Embedded Voluntary Non-Profit Action and Capitals Framework, which
combines the Neighbourhood-Embedded Voluntary Non-Profit Action and Neighbourhood-Embedded
Capitals categorisations. The first distinguishes action by level of formalisation, nature of approach and
size, identifying six different organisational types (charities, charitable trusts, grassroots, network-
actors, social enterprises and subsidiary organisations). These categories have been shaped by the
availability of Neighbourhood-Embedded Capitals. These strategically used resources comprise
overlapping forms of social, material, multicultural and moral-cognitive capitals. Overall, we draw
attention to the conditions and mechanisms under which minoritised populations leverage capitals to

                                                   22
                       British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                        University of Manchester
                                                                                  Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                        Paper Session 1
                                                                                            09:00-10:30
achieve organisational goals and deliver multi-purpose activities. We conclude that locally embedded
organisational types and capitals are overlooked in approaches researching VNP activities which rely
heavily on register data.


Precarious Housing, Precarious Belonging: Using Arts-Based Participatory Methods to Explore
the Experiences and Perspectives of Young Asylum Seekers Living in Temporary
Accommodation
Arrate De La Cruz
(Edinburgh Napier University)
In this paper, I discuss the role of participatory arts-based methods to produce respectful and
representative narratives of young asylum-seeking people and their experiences of temporary
accommodation in the UK. The right to adequate and safe housing is recognised as a fundamental
human right under international law, a right far from realised for many, including, against mainstream
media representations, asylum-seeking people in the UK. I situate my investigation within the UK
environment of hostility and inequality towards racialised individuals. I address the gap in research
regarding the effects of such housing precarity on the identity and belonging of young asylum-seeking
people, investigating the effects of these experiences at a crucial formative age. I theoretically and
practically account for how their exposure to epistemic injustices can not only affect the authentic
representation of their experiences, but their identity altogether. Drawing on preliminary findings from
my fieldwork with the young people, I contribute to the methodological discussion on how using
participatory arts-based methods, such as visual methods, can support bypassing some of these
injustices in keeping with a feminist praxis of care and allowing individuals to share their experiences in
a more representational and authentic manner.


Racialized Differences, Economic Sector Participation and Transnational Ways of Being of
Guyanese Immigrant Communities in New York City
Remi Anderson
(Florida International University)
Is there variance by ethnicity in the economic sector participation in the homeland and the host-land
and how might this have constitute differently the abilities of Guyanese of African and South Asian
Indian descent to migrate and negotiate transnational ways of being? My answer to this question
suggests that there is an opportunity to parse the current Caribbean and Guyanese migration
discourses by exploring how race / ethnicity and economic sector participation have varied over time
and how they might have produced different migration abilities, experiences, and strategic ways of being
for Guyanese. I argue that the use of the transnationalism paradigm, with a focus on conjunctural and
temporal specificities, produces two important outcomes. 1. It complicates the push - pull binary which
drives current Caribbean migrant discourses by examining racialized differences in economic sector
participation across space and time which has influenced Guyanese migration to its largest diaspora
enclaves in New York city. 2. It elicits thick descriptions of ethnic differences in the lived experiences of
migrants, their subjectivities and their negotiations of transnational ways of being in response to those
experiences.



Race, Ethnicity & Migration 2 - Room 2.218
Where the Aim is not to Integrate: The UK Seasonal Worker Visa and Agri-food Enclaves
Lydia Medland
(University of Bristol)
Low-wage labour migrants are employed in horticultural production in many wealthy countries,
increasingly through the use of seasonal work visas (Molinero-Gerbeau 2020). Seasonal work visas
are an example of where despite positive rhetoric on integration, exclusion from ongoing participation
in society is the policy goal. This article argues that seasonal work visas are a tool to maintain non-
integration of workers into residential areas around the UK where they live and work. While employers
                                                      23
                          British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                           University of Manchester
                                                                                Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                      Paper Session 1
                                                                                          09:00-10:30
construct farmworkers’ time in England as comparable to a holiday camp experience, I illustrate that
segregation is performed on an everyday basis through both hard and soft measures in everyday life.
Overall, these everyday exclusions produce micro-enclaves of production. The concepts of ‘ghetto’ and
‘enclave’ are discussed. Enclaves are considered most suitable to conceptualise the relation between
neo-liberal production interests and the spatial position of workers in labour-intensive horticulture. The
paper draws on county-level data obtained through a Freedom of Information (FOI) request, interview
data from farm workers and employers, and observational insights from fieldwork in five English
counties where seasonal work visas are used to employ migrants from outside the UK. The combination
of the tied nature of sponsorship, permanently temporary labour market access, social segregation in
rural spaces, and a lack of access to public funds, make seasonal workers part of a growing group of
marginalised workers elsewhere in the economy.


Toward a Critical Digital Migration Studies: Digital Nomads, Colonial Desires, and Privileged
Migration
Alexandra Eleazar
(University of California, Santa Barbara)
Digital labor and remote work are quickly complicating and changing the trajectory and possibilities of
migration (Hooper and Benton 2022), particularly for individuals seeking lifestyle migration
opportunities. Under conditions enabled by COVID-19, access to remote work and digital labour has
enabled increasing numbers of individuals to work outside the traditional workspace and be mobile
across national borders (Hermann and Paris 2020). While growing scholarship has examined the rise
of ‘digital nomads,’ this scholarship has largely been done outside of migration studies, and without
taking into account colonial contexts and global mobility regimes that allow these mobilities to begin
with.
Drawing from multimodal ethnographic research with North American and European remote workers
and expatriates in Guatemala, I show how digital labor economies are fundamentally shifting the
possibilities of migration and economic mobility for elites from the Global North, beyond the case of
digital nomads alone. In doing so, I highlight how the divisions between expatriate, digital nomad, and
tourist have become increasingly blurred. Furthermore, while the rise of new remote worker migration
to Central America is notable since the outbreak of COVID-19, waves of North American and European
migration have occurred to Guatemala for centuries. I show how contemporary migration possibilities
are founded upon past and ongoing colonial desires and imaginaries. And lastly, I unpack how these
privileged migration journeys are occurring concurrently with the increasing erasure of indigenous
rights, criminalization, and displacement in Guatemala and beyond, and how digital migration may be
creating a new frontier of inequality.


Ethics, Borders, and Labour: Reframing Migrant Recruitment and Legal Mobility in the UK
Roxana Barbulescu
(University of Leeds)
This paper interrogates the ethical imperatives and institutional architectures underpinning the
recruitment of migrant labour to the United Kingdom, with particular attention to the legal channels
through which such mobility is sanctioned. It situates contemporary UK migration policy within a broader
sociological framework that foregrounds the interplay between state sovereignty, market demand, and
human rights. Drawing on recent legislative reforms and sector-specific codes of practice—especially
in health and social care—the analysis explores how ethical recruitment is operationalised, and where
it falters. The paper critically examines the tension between the UK’s professed commitment to fair and
transparent migration governance and its increasingly restrictive visa regimes, which risk exacerbating
precarity among migrant populations. Ultimately, the paper argues for a reconceptualisation of
organising migration that centres ethical responsibility, transnational justice, and the lived experiences
of migrants within Britain’s evolving sociopolitical landscape.




                                                    24
                        British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                         University of Manchester
                                                                                   Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                         Paper Session 1
                                                                                             09:00-10:30
Gendered Discrimination of Migrant Labourers in India: A Human Rights Perspective on
Exploitation, Social Exclusion and Access to Justice
Sohini Chatterjee
(St. Xavier’s College (Autonomous), Kolkata)
Women migrant labourers represent one of the most vulnerable strata of the Indian informal economy.
This paper studies the gendered discrimination and marginalisation faced by female migrant labourers
in India, highlighting the tenets of human rights violations and the structural inequalities that aggravate
the exploitation of women in the labour force. Employed as domestic labourers, construction workers,
and agricultural labourers, they face challenges including wage disparities, unsafe working conditions,
and limited access to social protections.
Using an intersectional feminist lens of analysis, this discourse delineates how gender, compounding
with other social stratifications in India, exacerbates the marginalization of female migrant labourers. It
delves into the role played by socialization of women, highlighting how the vulnerabilities are inherited
and reproduced in contemporary migration. Delineating how old patterns of labour and patriarchy still
shape women’s migration today, this paper points out that sociology has often rendered migrant women
invisible. It deconstructs the legal loopholes and provisions, through case studies and qualitative
analysis shedding light on the culturally internalised structural inequalities that shape the lives of migrant
labourers in India.
Thereby, this paper suggests for rethinking ‘human rights;’ it calls for stronger enforcement of labor
laws, gender-sensitive policies, and greater inclusion of migrant women in policy dialogues, grounded
in lived realities. By centering the experiences of women migrant workers, it aims to contribute to the
broader sociological understanding of exploitation, marginalisation, and human rights in the Global
South, with a particular emphasis on labor rights and gender justice in India.



Race, Ethnicity & Migration 3 - Room 2.219
Forced Displacement and its Implications: The Moderating Role of Social Support and Self-
efficacy in Fostering Subjective Well-being of Afghan Refugees in Pakistan
Muhammad Mohsin
(University of Sargodha)
Fleeing from the home country and left behind whatever you have earned throughout your life is not an
easy choice. Forced displacement is significant global issue affecting millions of refugees worldwide.
Driven by armed conflict, violence, sectarianism, violation of human rights, it has become a challenge
which requires urgent response and prevention. In this context, the current study was an attempt to
analyze the implications of forced displacement on the subjective well-being of the Afghan Refugees in
Pakistan. The current study employed survey and cross sectional research designs. The universe of
the current study was Afghan Refugees settled in all provinces of Pakistan. The responses were
collected through interview schedule at different refugee’s camps, host communities, regulated and
unregulated houses etc. The results of the current study revealed that fear of deportation had negative
and significant relationship with subjective well-being. Similarly, Integration, social support, and self
efficacy had also significant but positive relationship with subjective well-being of the Afghan Refugees
in Pakistan. Moreover, the current study revealed that perceived discrimination had no significant
relationship with subjective well-being, but the relationship was significant with moderating effect of
social support and self efficacy. In the end, the current study has made both a theoretical and a practical
contribution. Theoretically, it has added to the literature on fear of deportation, perceived discrimination,
social support, self efficacy, integration, and subjective well being in context of Afghan refugees in
Pakistan; practically, it has suggested the policies recommendations for interventions based on what it
found.




                                                    25
                        British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                         University of Manchester
                                                                                 Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                       Paper Session 1
                                                                                           09:00-10:30
The Role of Faith and Religion for the Health of Roma Women Living in Czechia and South
Yorkshire
Olga Fuseini, Dr. Lois Orton
(University of Sheffield)
Roma women are thought to experience some of the worst health outcomes compared to the rest of
the European population. A lot has been written about the possible reasons for this. Explanations
started off by blaming their genetics, moved onto portraying Roma as victims of their own cultural
lifestyle and, more recently, identifying Anti-Gypsyism and gender disadvantages as the root of the
problem. Despite continued academic and political attention, the inequalities experienced by Roma,
and Roma women in particular, persist, and in some cases worsen. Christian faith is known to be
important in Roma culture. However, connections between religious faith and health are rarely made.
The findings reported in this paper aim to centre the lived experience of Czech and Slovak Roma women
living in Czechia and South Yorkshire by exploring the pre-existing beliefs and practices that have the
potential to both positively and negatively shape their health. Long term engagement, involving a series
of in-depth interviews and creative approaches (drawing methods from the visual arts and poetry) to
story the lives of these women revealed an important link between their religious faith and their mental
and physical health across four key areas: coping strategies, quality of life, death and dying, and
miracles. This paper will explore how the centring of Roma women’s stories in understandings of their
health can help broaden the narrative in ways that recognise not just disadvantage but also foreground
agency.



Social Divisions / Social Identities 1 -
Lecture Theatre A
Between Continuity and Change: The Role of Bureaucratic Elites in Democratic Transitions
Intissar Kherigi
(Ibn Haldun University)
This paper investigates the changing role of bureaucratic elites during democratic transitions, drawing
on Weberian theories of bureaucracy and the sociology of elites. In transitional contexts, the Weberian
tension between charismatic leadership and routinized administration becomes particularly acute:
politicians seek to assert new forms of legitimacy and mobilize constituencies for reforms, while
bureaucrats, as entrenched holders of technical expertise and organizational memory, negotiate their
place within shifting power structures. The paper draws on the case of Tunisia to analyze how political
transitions generate competition and circulation among elite groups. The paper draws on fieldwork
conducted in 2015-19, including 257 semi-structured interviews, analysis of official archives, and
participant observation at policy-related events.
The paper draws on the sociology of elites to analyze how administrative elites form, reproduce, and
adapt under conditions of uncertainty. It seeks to broaden this literature, which has largely concentrated
on political, corporate and global elites while paying less attention to bureaucratic elites. It also seeks
to contribute to theorizing how bureaucratic elites operate in the context of democratization in the Global
South, taking account of the colonial legacies, informality, hybrid forms of authority, and international
donor networks that shape elite reproduction in such contexts.
The paper argues that the sociology of elites must pay greater attention to political transitions as
moments of renegotiation between charismatic-political authority and bureaucratic-professional
authority. The analysis highlights how elite reproduction, co-optation, and contestation shape whether
democratic consolidation occurs or whether bureaucratic inertia and elite entrenchment undermine
reform.




                                                    26
                        British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                         University of Manchester
                                                                                   Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                         Paper Session 1
                                                                                             09:00-10:30
From the Perspective of Identity Process Theory, the Identity Transformation in Türkiye over the
Past Decades
Durali Karacan, Fatih Baş
(Eskisehir Osmangazi University)
Türkiye has experienced significant transformations in recent decades due to political and
socioeconomic developments that have impacted the economy, politics, jurisprudence, international
relations, society, and social groups. In the past few decades, the transformations of individual and
group identities have been among the most significant changes in Türkiye’s social life. "Identity
transformation" is a term that typically denotes the process by which an individual or group experiences
a substantial change in their sense of self, social roles, or the meanings they attribute to their identity.
This process involves changes in self-concept, which affects how individuals perceive themselves in
terms of their values, beliefs, goals, and roles. Notably, the concept of "threat to identity" has been a
highly contested issue in Türkiye during recent decades, with almost all groups asserting that their
identities are under threat. Identity Process Theory (IPT) was conceptualised with the goal of elucidating
and predicting how individuals and groups respond to psychological threats, especially those to identity.
According to IPT, a threat to identity emerges when processes of assimilation/accommodation become
impossible and fail to comply with the principles of continuity, distinctiveness, self-efficacy, self-esteem,
belonging, meaning, and psychological coherence, which these 7 principles are referred to as
"motivational identity principles". In this current qualitative study, the identity transformations in Türkiye
will be discussed by applying Identity Process Theory (IPT), focusing on motivational identity principles.
Semi-structured interviews will be conducted with 15 individuals belonging to various social groups. The
results will be analysed by applying Interpretative Phenomenological Analysis (IPA).


Spectemur Agendo: The Cyclical Nature of Fragmented Post-industrial Masculinities
Grace Batley
(University of Cambridge)
In August 2024, the Holiday Inn in Rotherham, temporarily housing asylum seekers, became a site of
national and international attention. Hundreds of ‘protesters’ gathered and as the day progressed,
windows were smashed and attempts made to set the building alight. Media and political narratives
framed the attendees as angry, uneducated, and violent. The tropes obscure the structural and
historical contributors that shaped the trajectories of men's lives to this date. These events are
connected to decades of economic and social rupture. The deindustrialisation of the 80s and its
aftermath reshaped working-class identity and produced conditions in which masculine rhetorics and
performances became fragmented and out of sync. The performance and masks of masculinity that are
observed in my hometown convey the complexities of social identities.
This work pulls on Gordons' social haunting, where past industrial and political ruptures continue to
shape the embodied experiences of masculinity. Drawing on Butler’s theory of performativity, Foucault’s
thinking of power and basing the work in critical theory, masculinities here are understood not as fixed
traits but as repeated, socially reinforced enactments,
Situated in my positionality as a woman from Barnsley and daughter of a miner, this project traces what
I coin the cycle of fragmented masculinities: identities formed through early socialisation, reinforced
through recognition, and sustained by fear of exclusion. Using portraiture as a scavenger methodology,
it centres lived experience and cultural memory to explore how masculinities in post-industrial South
Yorkshire persist, and manifest, capturing patterns and fracture without romanticising the past.


Growing Pains: Identity Work of the Emerging Nordic Tech Elite
Henri Koskinen, Anu Kantola
(University of Helsinki)
Because of recent shifts towards technology-driven and digitalized capitalism, new technology-based
elites are emerging all over the world, including the Nordic countries. In this study, we examine the
identity work of the Nordic tech elite, situating them as a case of new elite formation in the digital age.
Drawing from scholarship on social mobility and elite legitimation, we analyze how rapid upward mobility

                                                       27
                           British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                            University of Manchester
                                                                                 Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                       Paper Session 1
                                                                                           09:00-10:30
destabilizes classed self-understandings of the tech elite. Drawing on 28 interviews with Finnish and
Swedish tech founders, CEOs, and investors, we show how wealth accumulated in the new digital
economy creates dislocations between inherited class dispositions and newly acquired upper-class
status. To reconcile these tensions, the tech elite employs classed repertoires of ordinariness, modesty,
and social responsibility, situating themselves as egalitarian citizens rather than privileged elites. Yet
these strategies remain contradictory, as material affluence strains their identification with ordinariness.
We conceptualize this ambivalent positioning as the paradoxical symbolic position of the “middle-class
millionaire.” Our findings highlight how national cultural imaginaries – in this case Nordic egalitarianism
– shape elite identity work and elite legitimation. By theorizing elite formation as lived negotiation of
classed identities, we demonstrate how emerging elites are compelled to balance global capitalist
trajectories with local moral repertoires. Our study thus advances elite research by linking structural
transformations of capitalism to the subjective, cultural, and moral dimensions of emerging elite groups.



Social Divisions / Social Identities 2 - Room 1.219
‘An Inspiration to others’?: Strictly Come Dancing, Inspiration Porn and the Politics of Disability:
Ellie Goldstein Matters
Alison Wilde
(Northumbria University)
This paper focuses on Ellie Goldstein, a disabled contestant on the UK’s ‘Strictly Come Dancing’ show,
in 2025. It sets her casting as a celebrity within the broader context of the evolution of disabled
celebrities on the show since they were first cast in 2017, proceeding from the - comparatively non-
controversial - participation of well-known Paralympians, who seemed to carry the mantle of disability
inspiration tropes since the UK’s 2012 Paralympic Games. The integration, and popularity, of more
increasingly ‘‘risky’ characters with recognisable impairments - such as blind and Deaf celebrities - is
considered here in the climate of increasing ‘anti-woke’ complaints by sections of the audience and
mainstream press. Drawing on my recent analyses of comedy, talent, and recent Strictly celebrities with
sensory impairments, this paper follows the 2025 show’s coverage, and associated press and social
media discussions. It centres on Ellie Goldstein, a young woman, model and actress, with Down
Syndrome. - paying close attention to her own words and desire to become an ‘inspiration to others’, In
so doing, it uses Critical Discourse Analysis to chart changing understandings of learning disability in
relation to the show’s central values of talent, aesthetics, selfhood,and meritocracy. This draws on
frameworks drawn from Critical/Disability Studies and Reality Television, to place representations in
wider social context, considering the wider impacts on disabled people and people with learning
disabilities in particular.


Divided by Pride: Partisan Narratives of Nationalism in Korean Presidential Commemorative
Speeches
Jaemin Lee
(Chinese University of Hong Kong)
Nationalism is often seen as a unifying force, yet it can also divide citizens by promoting competing
visions of the nation. While computational studies have measured nationalist rhetoric in political speech,
they typically focus on inclusion or pride intensity, overlooking how national pride is qualitatively
constructed—limiting insights into nationalism’s role in political polarization.
This study builds on the concept of nationalist polarization, where partisan competition centers on
divergent nationalist visions. It analyzes all official South Korean presidential speeches delivered during
major commemorative events from 1949 to 2024—ritualized occasions where leaders define national
identity, celebrate history, and envision the future. Drawing on theories of nationalism and linguistic
research on tense and aspect, we distinguish between retrospective pride (celebrating past struggles)
and prospective pride (projecting future progress).
Using theory-driven seed verbs expanded via word-embedding similarity, we extracted past-tense
subject–verb–object (S–V–O) triplets. Ambiguous pronouns and demonstratives were clarified using
large language models to ensure accurate referent identification. Objects were categorized into five
                                                  28
                      British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                       University of Manchester
                                                                                  Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                        Paper Session 1
                                                                                            09:00-10:30
themes: Sovereignty & Security, Cultural Heritage & Tradition, Democracy & Rights, Economic
Development & Global Standing, and Challenges & Adversities.
We assess whether verb orientation and object emphasis vary systematically by partisan affiliation. Our
findings show how partisan variation in temporal framing and thematic focus can be detected through
fine-grained linguistic analysis of ceremonial political rhetoric, offering new insights into how nationalism
operates as a mechanism of political polarization.


‘The most fun we’ve had in ages!’: Politics and Play on the American Religious Right
Hannah Peterson
(University of Cambridge)
The “big tent” MAGA coalition is riddled with contradictions, including a series of quiet but surprising
faith alliances: Evangelicals collaborating with Mormons on political and cultural projects, and Orthodox
Jews submitting amici briefs on behalf of Muslims and Catholics. This paper asks: how do minority faith
groups themselves make sense of their engagement in MAGA politics?
In the United States, political engagement on the religious right is typically understood in terms of
instrumental motivations (e.g. the desire to secure material or symbolic advantages for one’s faith
group) or expressive motivations (e.g. the performance of religious identity to the state and other
citizens). Yet during six months of ethnographic fieldwork with two minority faith groups - Orthodox Jews
and Latter Day Saints - in the lead-up to and aftermath of the 2024 U.S. presidential election, I found
that these frameworks did not fully capture how my interlocutors understood their own engagement with
politics. Just as significant as instrumental and expressive motivations was a ludic motivation: a desire
to engage with U.S. politics because it served as a religiously sanctioned space to play and have fun.
This paper develops a ludic approach to politics, drawing on theories of play to conceptualize political
engagement on the religious right as a sandbox for experimenting with ideas about the future, attitudes
toward leadership, and conceptions of the self. I argue that the playful dimensions of MAGA politics are
not incidental but central to sustaining its “big tent” coalition.


Women’s Social Worlds in Autism Care: Support, Identity and Traces of Helicopter Parenting in
Urban Uttar Pradesh
Pratiksha Rai
(Banaras Hindu University)
Autism Spectrum Disorder remains an under-explored field in India’s Sociological landscape,
particularly in Uttar-Pradesh, where socio-cultural values impose rigid gendered expectations on
women. This research examines how cultural norms and socio-economic values influence the social
participation and support networks of women caregivers of autistic children in urban centres of Uttar
Pradesh.
Driven by the significant research gap concerning region-specific experiences, the study intends to
understand how social expectations shape caregiving responsibilities, social isolation, and access to
support. This paper is framed around major sociological theories, namely, Symbolic Interactionism and
Feminist perspective employing a mixed-methods approach. The study integrates semi-structured
interviews, case studies, and surveys with purposive and snowball sampling techniques to explore
parents’ lived experiences that trace Helicopter Parenting at its core. Thematic analysis provides
qualitative insights, while quantitative surveys highlight key trends in social participation and access to
formal and informal support systems.
Preliminary findings suggest that societal stigma, limited institutional support, and traditional role
expectations significantly constrain women’s ability to maintain social networks, often resulting in
emotional distress and social withdrawal. The study brings into focus the importance of culturally
contextualised policy measures aimed at empowering women caregivers and promoting inclusive
support structures. By contributing a regionally grounded understanding of the intersection between
autism, gender, and social support in Uttar Pradesh, this research aims to inform policy reforms and
expand academic discourse on caregiving in marginalised contexts.

                                                    29
                        British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                         University of Manchester
                                                                                    Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                          Paper Session 1
                                                                                              09:00-10:30

Sociology of Education 1 - Room 2.220
Aspiration-Achievement Paradox: Exploring Tertiary Education Goals of Urban Slum Youth in
Colombo
Sudeshika Wathtuwa Durayalage
(Bangor University)
This qualitative study examines the educational aspirations of disadvantaged urban youth in Colombo,
Sri Lanka, and how these ambitions are shaped by socio-cultural and economic contexts. The study
draws on 20 semi-structured interviews with young people and parents in Colombo’s low-income urban
communities, analyses them thematically through Bourdieu’s framework and an intersectional lens. This
study uncovers the interplay of individual goals, family expectations, structural barriers, and institutional
influences. Participants voiced diverse and often contradictory aspirations, ranging from professional
careers to vocational paths, reflecting both hope for upward mobility and awareness of systemic
constraints. Using Bourdieu’s concepts of habitus, capital, and field, alongside an intersectional lens,
the analysis demonstrates how class, gender, ethnicity, and religion intersect to produce distinctive
educational challenges. While many aspire to tertiary education, financial hardship, limited academic
preparation, and cultural norms generate an aspiration-achievement paradox, where high ambitions are
undermined by structural inequalities. Gender differences were evident: young women’s goals were
frequently restricted by safety concerns and social norms, while young men showed greater acceptance
of vocational routes. Family habitus, expressed through parental expectations and sibling trajectories,
strongly shaped aspirations. Despite these barriers, participants displayed resilience and agency in
navigating pathways to education and work. The study contributes to sociological debates on aspiration
and inequality by showing how global theories of educational mobility are reconfigured in postcolonial
urban contexts. It highlights the need for intersectional policy interventions that address the layered
constraints facing marginalised youth in Sri Lanka.


Meritocracy in East Asia’s Examination Regimes: Technical Capital and Legitimation Strategies
of Professional Elites in Taiwan
Chi-Chung Wang
(National Sun Yat-sen University)
How elites mobilise meritocratic discourses to justify their privileged positions has become a central
theme in recent studies of social inequality. This paper extends this line of enquiry by examining the
dominant meanings of ‘merit’ within East Asia’s standardised examination regimes and their
implications for inequality. Drawing on interview data with current students and recent graduates from
top departments in Taiwan’s elite universities, we show that academic elites flexibly mobilise either
‘talent’ or ‘effort’, depending on context. When distinguishing themselves within elite groups, the ability
to achieve exam success with ease is celebrated as the most valued principle. However, when their
privileged status is contested, narratives of effortful preparation become the common form of
justification. This discursive flexibility is rooted in the very nature of exam-related abilities, which bear
the characteristics of ‘technical capital’: seemingly objective, transparent, and acquirable in a relatively
linear fashion through formalised procedures. These qualities strengthen the legitimacy of meritocratic
discourses, enabling academic elites not only to publicly justify their advantages but also to secure
broader social acceptance. While such forms of meritocratic reasoning are particularly associated with
the professional middle and upper classes—such as doctors and engineers—rather than capitalist elites
in business, we argue that the content and legitimising force of meritocracy vary not only across regions
but also across the structural positions occupied by different elite groups.


Defining Eliteness: Prestige Hierarchies in Turkish Secondary Education
Vildan Ozerturk Sofu
(Independent Researcher)
Defining elite schools remains a contested issue. Existing studies in the literature on elite education
tend to focus on particular institutions without sufficiently clarifying the criteria that render them “elite.”

                                                    30
                        British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                         University of Manchester
                                                                                 Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                       Paper Session 1
                                                                                           09:00-10:30
Are all fee-paying private schools elite? Or are all long established schools elite? Just as there is no
universal definition of the elite, there is likewise no universally applicable definition of elite schools.
Rather, the criteria of distinction vary across societies and historical periods. Unlike most studies in the
field, in the Turkish context, prestige is attributed not only to private schools—most of which are foreign
(formerly missionary) institutions—but also to state schools, some considered even more prestigious
than private ones. This study examines prestigious high schools within the Turkish elite educational
field and proposes both a methodology and a “prestige hierarchy” of Turkish high schools based on the
number and nature of their mechanisms of distinction. The study draws on existing typologies of elite
education, (such as Gaztambide-Fernández’s five ideal-type categories of American elite schools and
Courtois’s four-category classification of Irish elite schools) to develop a context-specific framework for
understanding prestige hierarchies in the Turkish educational context. Drawing on a detailed analysis
of 48 prestigious secondary schools, the study eventually advances a four-category prestige hierarchy
that delineates the contours of the elite education field in Türkiye.



Sociology of Education 2 - Room 3.204
Working-class Women on Access to HE Courses Two Decades Apart: A Comparative Analysis
of Risk, Opportunity and the (Re)Construction of Identities across a 20-year Period
Richard Waller, Sarah Mclaughlin
(University of the West of England, Bristol)
Widening participation (WP) in higher education (HE) remains a significant component of UK education
and wider social policy landscapes. It aims to create a university system addressing the
underrepresentation of particular social groups. Mature working-class students are one such group, yet
they have recently largely disappeared from policy discourse. The journey for those entering university
via an Access to HE course provides valuable context to the WP agenda. This paper presents a
comparative analysis of two narrative studies conducted 20 years apart. It evidences the ongoing value
of progressing into HE for mature working-class women taking an Access course, and the continuing
reflexivity and risk, confusion and contradictions experienced by mature students during their course.
The findings of the 2022 research echo those of the 2001 project and further challenges the assumption
that a changing learner identity necessitates a corresponding shifting class identity. However, 20 years
on, the second cohort faced increased financial risks, further compounding the students’ class positions,
especially those who were parents. This is significant to the WP agenda because it highlights particular
barriers for this group of students and suggests that getting into, and engaging with HE, remains
challenging and presents significant specific risks to them.
The research makes visible the realities of ongoing class, gender and aged-based inequalities,
highlighting how they are experienced and how they continue to shape educational and employment
trajectories. We present practitioner-led enquiry as a valid epistemology offering important insights into
mature women students’ journeys into and within university.


Exploring Working-class Women’s Transition to University across Generations
Kaidong Yu
(University of Sheffield)
This study explores the interrelationship between class and gender in the narratives of working-class
women’s experiences of education and social mobility. While the expansion of higher education (HE)
since the 1960s has provided more opportunities for female students, class and gender inequalities
continue to shape working-class women’s transitions to university across different time periods.
Drawing on Bourdieu’s concept of habitus, extensive scholarship has examined how classed and
gendered structures constrain women’s choices of and experiences of university study. However, as
many critiques of Bourdieu suggest, women’s agency remains difficult to see in their navigation of
challenges and constraints in accessing HE. This study adopts an intergenerational approach by
situating different generations of working-class women who successfully attended university within the
changing historical contexts of HE policies. Through life-history interviews with three sample cohorts of
16 women participants, this research identifies key differences in how participants realised and
                                                    31
                        British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                         University of Manchester
                                                                                 Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                       Paper Session 1
                                                                                           09:00-10:30
understood opportunities and constrains for HE attendance— with older cohorts viewing HE as a means
to resist traditional gender expectations of marriage and childbirth, while younger cohorts emphasising
independence and social mobility. A gendered perspective on working-class women’s transitions to
university not only highlights the important role of changing educational policies in shifting working-class
women’s university aspirations but also reveals working-class women’s agency in challenging shifting
gendered norms across generations. This research, therefore, contributes to a more dynamic
understanding of habitus by considering how shifting gendered expectations and women’s agency
interact.


Navigating HE Choices with Care Experience: An Exploration of Decision-making and
Applications to Undergraduate Study amongst Young People with Care Experience in England
Fionna MacLauchlan
(King's College London)
The educational outcomes of children and young people in state care or with care experience have
been an international concern for several decades. In more recent years, there has been a growing
evidence base on the relationship between experience of children’s social care during childhood and
access and transition to higher education (HE). Within this literature, less is known about how young
people with care backgrounds experience HE decision-making and the application process, and how
this distinct phase in access and transition interacts with the challenges of leaving care and lived
experience of children’s social care in England. This study, therefore, aimed to examine how and to
what extent care experience can interact with HE choices and the application process. The study used
a mixed methods research design that included an online questionnaire (n=91) and semi-structured
interviews (n=16) with care experienced young people aged 18-25 studying in the UK. The study draws
on a theoretical framework that brought Bourdieu’s (1990) theory of practice into dialogue with Markus
and Nurius’s (1986) theory of possible selves. Findings revealed that young people with care experience
faced specific challenges with HE choices and the application process that were directly related to their
care backgrounds. The study concludes that these challenges risk impeding on young people’s access
and success in HE and that these inequities will persist unless the quality, depth, personalisation and
reach of institutional support services for HE exploration, choices and the application process are
significantly improved.



Theory - Room 4.205
Special Event
Critical Encounters: Rethinking Classifications, Histories, and Intellectual Practices
Zeina Al Azmeh, Sebastian Raza, Seetha Tan, Patrick Baert
(University of Cambridge)
This panel explores the ways in which critique can be reimagined at a time when intellectual
positionalities, disciplinary divides, and political classifications, risk hardening into orthodoxy. With
individual contributions that examine domains like sociology’s relation to history including its own, the
role of intellectuals under shifting conjunctures, and the legacies of postcolonial difference, the session
examines how categories and narratives that once enabled critique can themselves become rigid,
reductive, or exclusionary. Contributors, already in conversation as part of a research group at
Cambridge Sociology, ask: what happens when critique collapses into group loyalty, or when history
and postcolonial theory are reduced to binary framings that obscure internal complexity? How might we
move beyond canonisation, nostalgia, or tribalisation without abandoning the ethical and political force
of critique? By foregrounding plural, context-sensitive, and ethically demanding practices, whether of
intellectual positioning, historical reasoning, or identity negotiation, the session opens space for
rethinking critique as situated encounter rather than settled paradigm. The aim is to recover the vitality
of critique as discernment under constraint, and to consider how sociology can sustain openness and
responsiveness while resisting the drift into relativism or orthodoxy.


                                                   32
                       British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                        University of Manchester
                                                                                      Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                            Paper Session 1
                                                                                                09:00-10:30
From Orthodoxy to Attunement: Situational Intellectualism as Critical Practice
Zeina Al Azmeh
(University of Cambridge)
This chapter introduces the concept of the situational intellectual as both a descriptive framework and
a normative orientation. Traditional typologies of intellectuals (e.g., universal, specific, organic,
autonomous) assume relatively stable modes of engagement and risk reifying critique into a fixed
posture. In contrast, situational intellectualism treats critique as a practice of discernment: contingent,
relational, and responsive to shifting conjunctures of power, affect, and history. Drawing on Baert’s
positioning theory, Bourdieu’s study of autonomy and engagement, and Deleuze’s philosophy of
becoming, I conceptualise the intellectual as an assemblage in flux whose interventions are continually
reconfigured by loyalty, fear, trauma, and fatigue as much as by reason or conviction.
This perspective responds to a key pathology of the present: the tribalisation of critique, whereby
political and intellectual allegiances harden into forms of belonging that resemble pre-modern identities.
In such contexts, critique risks collapsing into group loyalty, where affirmation of one’s “side” substitutes
for reasoned engagement. Situational intellectualism resists this drift by foregrounding judgment under
constraint: recognising that all knowledge is situated within normative frames, and that the task is not
to transcend normativity in the name of objectivity, but to navigate it with ethical responsiveness and
responsibility, including to oneself and the contextual and temporal specificities they navigate.
By shifting attention from critique as orthodoxy to critique as situated practice, the paper highlights the
discernment required to decide when to speak, how to intervene, and under what pressures. It offers
an alternative to both absolutist moralism and opportunistic flexibility, reclaiming critique as a plural,
context-sensitive, and ethically demanding practice that makes visible the everyday encounters through
which critique is both enacted and contested.


Sociology and the History of Sociology
Sebastian Raza
(University of Cambridge)
This paper offers a reflection on the relation between sociology and the history of sociology. It does so
in two moments. The first moment deals with what I call “actually existing attitudes” towards the
discipline’s past in sociology. My concern here is to look at how sociologists effectively relate to the
discipline’s past, and try to characterize and offer an initial evaluation of the different approaches. I start
by identifying three different actually existing attitudes to the past: reckoning, ignoring, and canonization.
I then offer a tentative explanation of why the discipline affords these different attitudes to the past in
the first place. My argument is that each attitude coincides with a different interpretation of the
discipline’s purpose. If sociology is seen as a moral and political project, the tendency is to reckon with
the discipline’s past; if the discipline’s scientific ambitions take priority, the history of sociology is largely
ignored; and if the discipline is seen as part a larger humanistic endeavour, the tendency is to take a
canonizing attitude. I proceed to specify and characterize each attitude to the past in terms of its
temporal horizon, how they conceive the relationship between the discipline and its environments, and
– crucially – what role they give to historical argumentation in sociological reasoning. I conclude that
arbitrating between different “actually existing attitudes” towards the discipline’s past is tantamount to
favouring one vision of the discipline, which is not a beneficial move to make if we want to maintain the
value pluralism that allows sociologists to have different understandings of the discipline in the first
place.
I then proceed to the second moment in this paper. I argue that a way out of this dilemma is to move
from “actually existing attitudes” to what I call “the logical problem of historicity” in sociological
reasoning. I draw a distinction between narratives and historical arguments to point to two different
issues at stake in the historicity of sociology. First, I deal with the issue of narrativity in the formation of
social-scientific disciplines, which centres on the role of narratives in the formation and consolidation of
disciplines, but also, crucially, the limits and tensions in the act of narration itself. Second, I assess the
logic of different forms of historical argumentation in terms of their sociological relevance. I identify the
scope and limits of specific forms of historical argumentation that make the history of sociology relevant
to the practice of sociology. My main argument is that sociology itself is shaped by how the history of
discipline is narrated, and that historical arguments hold relevance and are useful to sociology, but that
                                                     33
                         British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                          University of Manchester
                                                                                         Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                               Paper Session 1
                                                                                                   09:00-10:30
neither narrativity nor historical argumentation are simple matters. The detour into “the logical problem
of historicity” in sociological reasoning does not allow us to arbitrate among “actually existing attitudes”,
but at least provide us with some coordinates to place, clarify and assess concrete historical arguments
in the discipline.


Rethinking Postcolonial Difference beyond Binary Oppositions
Seetha Tan
(University of Cambridge)
In seeking to address the legacies of imperialism, postcolonial critique has been preoccupied with
certain forms of ‘difference’. Despite seeking to repudiate the very binary oppositions empire
constructed, canonical framings of ‘West vs. Rest’ (Hall, 1992), ‘Orient vs. Occident’ (Said, 1978),
‘metropole vs. periphery’ and more recently, ‘Global North vs. Global South’ risk naturalising certain
analytical framings. These binary oppositions not only represent the colonised ‘Other’ as a stable and
coherent category, but frame this ‘Otherness’ exclusively in relation to the colonial power. In doing so,
they overlook how difference operates within cultural categories themselves. Recent reconfigurations
of postcolonial identity, evidenced by the political shift of certain marginalised communities from Labour
to the Conservative right, indicate that these frameworks may no longer be sufficient.
This chapter has several interconnected aims. First, given its reliance on the very classificatory systems
it seeks to dismantle, this chapter interrogates whether existing models of postcolonial critique can
avoid the reification of cultural categories. Second, in reflecting on how postcolonial critique has
canonically theorised mechanisms of ‘othering,’ I draw on empirical reflections that examine how
postcolonial migrants living in London negotiate difference within a category of identity. While important
work has foregrounded the tensions between categories such as “Black” and “British”, or “Indian” and
“British,” limited work has been dedicated to problematising difference within these categories
themselves. In attending to the emerging ideological, social, and cultural conditions shaping
postcolonial identity today, I interrogate the utility of existing postcolonial frameworks within the present
conjuncture. This chapter, therefore, offers a new framework for understanding postcolonial difference
that attends to the complexity of identity formation in Britain.


What is ‘Critical’ about Critical Social Science?
Patrick Baert
(University of Cambridge)
Social scientists frequently use the term ‘critical’ to refer to the type of intellectual endeavour in which
they are involved. We often hear about academics writing about their work as ‘critical sociology’, ‘critical
social research’, ‘critical social analysis’, ‘critical theory’, ‘critical social work’, ‘critical realism’, ‘critical
race theory’, and so on. The term has become so ubiquitous that arguably it has lost some of its
erstwhile semantic power. In this contribution, we try to answer a variety of questions in relation to this
curious phenomenon. What or whom do critical researchers criticise, and in what sense does this critical
endeavour contrast with other form of social research?



Work, Employment & Economic Life -
Room 3.213
Exploring the Experiences of Black African Nurses (BANs) in the UK Healthcare System: An
Interpretative Phenomenological Analysis (IPA) Approach
Oluchi Mellor
(University of Edinburgh)
This study explores the lived experiences of Black African nurses (BANs) within the UK healthcare
system, using an Interpretative Phenomenological Analysis (IPA) approach. Despite their significant
contributions, BANs often encounter systemic inequalities, workplace discrimination, and challenges to
                                                      34
                          British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                           University of Manchester
                                                                               Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                     Paper Session 1
                                                                                         09:00-10:30
professional identity that remain under-researched. Through in-depth interviews, this study captures
how these nurses navigate the intersections of race, migration, and professional expectations,
highlighting both the personal and structural dimensions of their experiences.
The research foregrounds themes of resilience, cultural negotiation, and professional marginalization,
revealing how BANs construct meaning in contexts that may simultaneously valorize and constrain their
labour. By situating these experiences within broader sociological debates on inequality, migration, and
organizational culture, the study contributes to understanding the persistent gaps between policy
intentions and lived realities in healthcare.
This presentation invites sociological reflection on systemic inequities in professional settings and
demonstrates the value of qualitative, interpretative methodologies in capturing the nuanced, embodied
experiences of marginalized groups. The findings also suggest directions for policy, practice, and future
research aimed at fostering inclusivity and equity in healthcare workplaces.


Learned Friends? Schooling, Social Class and Professional Life at the Bar of England and Wales
Hannah Wilson
(London School of Economics and Political Science)
A middle-class family background and a private education have been shown to exert enduring influence
over the course of professional careers in the UK. In this paper, I present mixed-methods research on
the self-employed Bar of England and Wales which unpicks how social class origins, primarily
understood through a Bourdieusian lens, shape careers within a profession often perceived to be “elite”.
Using an administrative dataset covering the entire profession I investigated the relationship between
earnings and secondary schooling among barristers. This revealed a raw earnings gap which saw state
educated practitioners earn 75% that of their privately educated colleagues. A substantial part of this
gap was explained by barristers with different educational backgrounds sorting into different types of
legal practice. Privately educated barristers are over-represented in desk-based specialisms, such as
Commercial and Chancery. Areas requiring barristers to undertake regular courtroom advocacy, which
include Crime and Family, are more open to those who have passed through the state school system.
Interviews with 62 barristers revealed the existence of a cultural schema at the Bar which polarises
specialisms either by perceived complexity or by purported engagement with human messiness. The
different practical ways that working lives are configured according to specialism means that social
class background, and in particular embodied cultural capital, does not have a universal salience across
the profession. The paper concludes by proposing the importance of lawyers’ social class backgrounds
in the current conjuncture, where challenges to the rule of law and to lawyers’ independence abound.


Understanding the Labour Market Experiences of Professional British Pakistani Women from
the North of England
Aqsa Dar
(University of Exeter)
This paper explores the working lives of 20 British Pakistani professional women, aged between 35 and
58, who were brought up and educated in the north of England. 50% of the women were the
breadwinners in their families and 25% constitute a longitudinal cohort who were interviewed about their
career aspirations 14 years ago. Through in-depth biographical interviews I explore the nuances of
how women navigated the labour market and the barriers and opportunities they experienced across
different stages of their life course. This paper will focus on how my interviewees experienced obtaining
advanced qualifications and training. They worked hard to prepare themselves for the world of work
through acquiring high-level skills and held desirable attributes. Workplaces contributed to further
professional and self-development; however, such commitments from the workplace were not uniformly
present in my interviewees’ working lives and I will discuss this variation. The whole-life approach to
research illuminates how earlier hopes became subjected to challenging workplace environments and
any single triumphalist account of Asian women’s social mobility does not capture the whole story of
their working lives. This paper contributes to the sociological practice of employment and women’s
social mobility.


                                                     35
                         British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                          University of Manchester
                        BREAKTIME SESSION
                            10:35-10:55
                         Mezzanine, University Place

Japanese Tea Ritual
Ikuko Tomomatsu
(University of Osaka)
Experience the Zen of Japanese Tea Ritual Take a moment of tranquility amidst the conference buzz.
We invite you to a demonstration of the Japanese tea ritual, presented by Sōiku (Dr Ikuko Tomomatsu).
Rooted in the Zen philosophy of "Ichigo Ichie" (treasuring every unique encounter), this session offers
a mindful escape through the art of Matcha.
Interactive Experience: We will hold two sessions (approx. 20 minutes each), with a possibility of a third
session upon request. For each session, three participants are invited to sit and enjoy Matcha and
Japanese sweets. As spaces are very limited, pre-booking is required. Please email
kirsten.boucher@britsoc.org.uk if you would like to attend this experience. Email requests must be
received no later than Tuesday 31 March 2026.
The Tea Ritual will take place on Day 1 and Day 2 during the refreshment break in the mezzanine area
from 10:35am - 10:55am.




                                                    36
                        British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                         University of Manchester
                                    PAPER SESSION 2
                                       11:00-12:30




                                               Session Table of Contents
BSA Special Activity - Lecture Theatre B .......................................................................................... 38
Cities, Mobilities, Place & Space - Room 3.211 ................................................................................ 38
Culture, Media, Sport & Food - Room 3.210 ..................................................................................... 39
Environment & Society - Room 4.214 ............................................................................................... 40

Families & Relationships 1 - Room 4.204 ......................................................................................... 42
Families & Relationships 2 - Room 4.209 ......................................................................................... 43
Families & Relationships 3 - Room 4.211 ......................................................................................... 44

Lifecourse - Room 4.213 ................................................................................................................... 46
Medicine, Health & Illness - Room 3.209 .......................................................................................... 47
Methodological Innovations - Room 4.206 ........................................................................................ 49
Race, Ethnicity & Migration 1 - Room 2.217 ..................................................................................... 50

Race, Ethnicity & Migration 2 - Room 2.218 ..................................................................................... 51
Race, Ethnicity & Migration 3 - Room 2.219 ..................................................................................... 52
Science, Technology & Digital Studies - Room 3.205....................................................................... 54
Social Divisions / Social Identities 1 - Lecture Theatre A .................................................................. 55
Social Divisions / Social Identities 2 - Room 1.218 (Special Event) ................................................. 57
Social Divisions / Social Identities 3 - Room 1.219 ........................................................................... 59
Sociology of Education 1 - Room 2.220 ............................................................................................ 61
Sociology of Education 2 - Room 3.204 ............................................................................................ 63
Theory - Room 4.205......................................................................................................................... 65

Work, Employment & Economic Life 1 - Room 3.212 ....................................................................... 66
Work, Employment & Economic Life 2 - Room 3.213 ....................................................................... 68




                                                         37
                             British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                              University of Manchester
                                                                                Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                      Paper Session 2
                                                                                          11:00-12:30

BSA Special Activity - Lecture Theatre B
Navigating Mid-Career in Sociology: Collective Strategies & Shared Realities
Kathryn McEwan, Saorfhlaith Burton
(University of Newcastle, Robert Gordon University)
This session offers a space for sociologists navigating the mid-career stage to think collectively about
what this career stage looks like in practice, and what kinds of support can help.
Mid-career is often framed as a period of stability or momentum, yet many sociologists experience it
differently. Pressures around leadership, research, teaching, institutional service, and care
responsibilities frequently intensify at the same time, while expectations become less explicit and routes
forward opaque. This session responds to those realities by focusing on shared experience,
practicalities, and collective sense-making rather than individualised narratives of success.
The session will combine short provocations from established sociologists and BSA trustees, alongside
facilitated discussion with the Mid-Career Forum convenors. Drawing on themes emerging from recent
Forum activity, conversation will explore issues such as time pressure, uneven recognition, leadership
without authority, sustaining research identity, and the emotional and relational labour of academic life.
Rather than formal papers, the emphasis is on reflection, dialogue and practical insight. Participants
will be invited to contribute their own perspectives and to help shape how the BSA Mid-Career Forum
can support sociologists at this stage in meaningful, realistic ways.
This event will be relevant to mid-career sociologists across sub-disciplines, as well as those
approaching this career phase or supporting colleagues within it.



Cities, Mobilities, Place & Space - Room 3.211
Urban Informality and Water Precarity: Negotiating Rights and Belonging in Jaipur’s
Settlements
Tripti Singh, Vangelis Pitidis
(University of Warwick)
Rapid urbanisation in India has intensified the precarities of informal settlements, where insecure
tenure, overcrowding, inadequate housing, and limited access to services intersect. Water provisioning
makes these vulnerabilities particularly visible, as municipal piped supply is often contingent on land
tenure. Residents also live with the constant threat of eviction, which shapes their strategies for
accessing services and asserting rights. This research examines everyday water practices in two
informal settlements in Jaipur, one with household piped connections and another dependent on
communal water points. Using participatory methods, including social mapping, water resource
mapping, stakeholder network mapping, and interviews, the study co-produces knowledge with
residents to trace how they negotiate belonging, manage risks, and exercise agency amid infrastructural
precarity.
Findings indicate that water insecurity varies across settlements, depending on their degree of state
recognition. Surveyed settlements are often considered “less informal” and receive more services, while
others remain excluded, producing fragmented governance. Under the Swachh Bharat Mission, the
national sanitation programme, toilets are provided based on household ownership, even in areas
without municipal piped water, which remains linked to tenure. Uneven recognition compels residents
to adopt socially embedded coping strategies, including pooling resources for private tankers,
mobilising community organisations, and collectively petitioning authorities. The findings challenge
binary notions of formal and informal settlement. By centring marginalised voices, the study shows how
recognition politics deepen vulnerability and calls for decoupling essential services from tenure.
Addressing these inequities is crucial to advancing the right to the city and shaping more inclusive urban
futures.

                                                    38
                        British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                         University of Manchester
                                                                                  Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                        Paper Session 2
                                                                                            11:00-12:30
Village Rhythms
Aksel Tjora
(Norwegian University of Science and Technology)

This paper is based on a 10-months’ ethnography in Sydney’s Inner West area during 2022-23, and
explores how aspects of time and place/space are connected to the experience of community and
connection. Based on (1) a stranger’s perspective, using an auto-ethnographic experience of
disconnection from local time/space rhythms and (2) 43 depth interviews of local residents of various
ages and situations, I explore how individual and collective social rhythms emerge on basis of (1)
events, (2) places/spaces, (3) situations and (4) communication, the latter being both analogue and
digital. Core theoretical starting points include social infrastructures as platforms for social interaction
(Klinenberg 2018), social affordances of places/spaces and communication layers (cf. Hutchby 2001,
Tjora 2011), the idea of social rhythms that constitute types of events (Tjora 2016) and how vast arrays
of communal forms (Tjora & Scambler 2020) provide connection – and disconnection – in various ways.
The study rests on a phenomelological sociology, to study the knowledge that is applied by individuals
to interpret and understand (inter-subjectively) everyday social intereaction (cf. Schütz 1970). In
conclusion, I suggest “village rhythms” as a type of communal form that connects the individual to a
location and its members, but not independent of a “social location” related to cultural capital and
demographic structures, like class, age, and gender. What we may term “social arrhythmicity» - not
comprehending or being able to conform to this rhythm - may lead to isolation and loneliness, which
seem to be increasing challenges in our societies.



Culture, Media, Sport & Food - Room 3.210
Language Politics, Resistance, and Reception: Kneecap at Flow Festival 2025 in Helsinki,
Finland
Erica Aberg, Alma Rinta-Pollari
(University of Turku)
This presentation examines the performance of the Northern Irish rap group Kneecap and its reception
at the Flow Festival in Helsinki, August 2025. Known for their Irish-language lyrics and unapologetically
activist performances, Kneecap’s appearance drew attention for its explicit solidarity with Palestine and
criticism of Finland’s arms exports to Israel, with stage visuals stating: “Free Palestine” and “The Finnish
government enables genocide.”
Kneecap’s show is analysed through the lens of cultural sociology and performance, focusing on how
language, symbolism, and audience participation created a moment of collective resistance. Drawing
on media coverage, festival reports, and participant observation, we examine how Kneecap’s message
resonated in the Finnish context. Much of the public debate surrounding Flow Festival was focused on
its ownership of private equity firm KKR—whose Israeli ties Kneecap and other artists openly criticised
on stage. This critique echoed a local campaign, Flowstrike, calling to boycott the festival of its corporate
connections. The campaign gained visibility throughout the weekend: artists’ public statements in
support of Palestine, QR codes linking to aid organisations in stage projections, and artists pledging to
donate their fees to humanitarian causes.
This case study contributes to research on the sociopolitical role of music and the affective dynamics
of festival spaces. Kneecap’s performance became a moment of shared frustration and defiance—
towards both the Finnish government and the festival itself—while also offering the audience an
opportunity to publicly express solidarity with Palestine in a highly visible cultural space.


We Gotta Get Out of this Place: A Case Study in the Infrapolitics of Resistance in and through
Popular Music
Marek Korczynski




                                                    39
                        British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                         University of Manchester
                                                                                 Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                       Paper Session 2
                                                                                           11:00-12:30
(University of Nottingham)
The central theoretical frame for the paper is an engagement with Scott’s arguments in Domination ad
the Arts of Resistance (1990) regarding the potential for cultural expressions to become part of an
infrapolitics of resistance among those in subordinate positions within a social setting. Empirically, the
paper focuses on the case of the song, We Gotta Get Out Of This Place, by The Animals, and considers
how Scott’s arguments help us understand the reception of The Animals’ version of the song. The
paper analyses the reception and use of the song by those in subordinate positions in two social
contexts. It analyses Werner and Bradley’s (2016)) findings and arguments regarding the meaning and
role of the song for young conscripted USA soldiers in the Vietnam war, and Korczynski’s (2014)
findings in his ethnography of work and music in low skill factory work Despite important differences in
the two settings, in both cases, the song had considerable resistive resonance. Scott’s concepts help
us see key commonalities across these settings. Turning to analyse the specifics of the potential for
popular music to be used as an infrapolitics of resistance, the paper considers how The Animals’
remaking of the original Barry Mann and Cynthis Weil demo dramatically enhanced the potential for the
song to be used an infrapolitics of resistance. Here, the paper analyses the importance of the ways in
which the Animals’ made changes in the lyric, the melody, the harmonic arrangement, the
instrumentation, and the vocal style.



Environment & Society - Room 4.214
Waste as Relation: Studying Toxic Infrastructures and Health Inequalities
Gala Rexer
(University of Warwick)
In this paper, I approach waste as a heuristic to think with in the context of anti-incineration protests in
North London and knowledge production about the health effects of air pollution more broadly. This
ethnographic paper is centered around the Edmonton waste incinerator, which currently burns about
500,000 tonnes of waste a year and releases lead, mercury, and ultra-fine particulate matter into
Edmonton, one of London’s most disadvantaged neighborhoods. Drawing on my ethnographic work
with activists at the incinerator site, as well as interviews with local council members, policy makers,
scholars, and employees in local waste management, this piece examines the various and sometimes
contradictory forms of knowledge, expertise, and methodologies required to capture the health effects
of waste incineration and air pollution. Bridging the fields of environmental sociology, queer theory, and
discard studies, this paper offers three interconnected ways of thinking with and about waste: 1) waste
as spatial relation, 2) waste as biomedical relation, and 3) waste as a “boundary object” that allows for
various meanings, actors, and scientific practices to co-exist and co-produce each other. In so doing, I
argue that taking waste and its toxicity seriously as materials and material realities allows for a more
expansive understanding of racial, urban, and embodied inequality.


Dignity in Circular Dirty Work in the Indian Circular Economy
Lynn Wilson, Tulika Singh
(University of Glasgow)
Waste pickers in India are integral to the country’s waste management system, and the transition to the
circular economy. The concept of a circular economy where there is value in waste being transformed
into regenerative and valorised product, can lead to independent income streams for the lowest caste,
female members of Indian society, supported by nonprofit organisations. Some organisations teach
workers the dignity of making a resource out of consumer waste streams, such as food, plastic and
textiles and this in turn ensures they find pride and satisfaction, as well as generating an income from
their work. To date little is known about consumer perceptions in India about the concept of the circular
economy in relation to what is traditionally seen as a way of subsidizing municipal services that often
fail to meet the growing volume of waste. Despite their significant role in environmental sustainability,
waste pickers face social and economic marginalization. This research seeks to explore the role of
circular waste management non-profit organisations, within India’s waste management system,
examining both the opportunities and challenges related to the business model, and what it means for

                                                   40
                       British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                        University of Manchester
                                                                                 Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                       Paper Session 2
                                                                                           11:00-12:30
the women and consumers engaged in the process. This paper explores the changing landscape of
waste management in India, from a contextual perspective, examining whether there can ever be
equality and dignity in managing other people’s waste and what the Indian waste management systems,
can teach us, about the role of dignity in the face of the climate crisis.


Can ‘Sustainable Development’ Survive Integrated World Capitalism? Four Challenges and a
Resolution
Nick Fox
(University of Huddersfield)
This paper critically examines the challenges to the United Nations’ (2015) sustainable development
goals posed by a global capitalist economic mode that perpetuates resource extraction capitalism,
consumption and the accumulation of capital and deepens social inequalities, while paying lip-service
to ecological and social well-being.
Drawing on interdisciplinary scholarship and theories of the more-than-human dynamics of capitalism,
the paper critiques the co-option of sustainable development into neoliberal discourses. It explores how
extractive practices – both material and financial – intensify ecological degradation, while the expansion
of market logic subordinates environmental sustainability to profit and capital accumulation via ‘green
capitalism’. It also considers how capitalism is implicated in sustaining and broadening social divisions.
Simultaneously, the capitalist state serves as a facilitator of these dynamics, co-opting sustainability
efforts within market-oriented frameworks.
The paper highlights a need for a shift in economic policy that undermines the dynamics of supply and
demand that feed the logic of global capital accumulation. It concludes by advocating a range of
measures that can tame supply and demand to address each of the UN’s seventeen sustainable
development goals.


Climate Apartheid in the Home: Racialised Bodies, Housing Inequality and the Intimate Politics
of Heat in Britain
Adeela Zaka
(Tu Dortmund University)
This paper introduces the concept of domestic climate apartheid to interrogate how Pakistani women
in Britain inhabit the embodied inequalities of climate change. While sociologists increasingly analyse
the global politics of climate (Ghosh, 2016; Kenis & Lievens, 2017), little has been written on how
environmental crisis is lived within the intimate spaces of the home. Drawing on ethnographic
observations and preliminary interviews, the study investigates how overcrowded flats, poor insulation,
and energy poverty magnify experiences of heat, humidity, and respiratory strain during extreme
weather events.
For women responsible for sustaining households, these thermal vulnerabilities accumulate over time:
sleepless nights, children’s health issues, elders’ fragility, and chronic exhaustion from caring in
overheated conditions. Such findings echo environmental justice frameworks (Bullard, 2005) but extend
them by foregrounding embodied temporalities: how exhaustion accrues across days and seasons, and
how housing precarity is inherited across generations.
The paper argues that climate crisis cannot be reduced to emissions targets or carbon budgets; it must
also be understood through sweating bodies, disrupted rhythms of care, and everyday negotiations of
survival in hostile domestic environments. By theorising domestic climate apartheid, the study unsettles
universal framings of climate vulnerability and contributes a distinctive conceptual vocabulary for linking
environmental sociology with race, gender, and migration.




                                                   41
                       British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                        University of Manchester
                                                                                 Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                       Paper Session 2
                                                                                           11:00-12:30

Families & Relationships 1 - Room 4.204
Beyond the Passive and Unknowing Child: Using 'Child as Method' to Critique the Colonial
Trope of ‘Saving the Innocent Child’
Brenda Herbert
(University College London)
In this paper I critique the trope of ‘saving the innocent child’. This paper asks what work does it do
when we hold children in this passive state? Using Burman’s (2018) Child as method approach, I
analyse how different tropes of childhood are mobilised to uphold a patriarchal and colonial social order.
I theorise how these tropes enable children who are marginalised, through race, poverty and abuse, to
be dehumanised and creates an epistemic injustice that renders children unknowing in the production
of knowledge about their own lives, and further marginalise them. I demonstrate how through using
multimodal ethnography we can decolonise and democratise knowledge creation with children that
goes beyond ‘saving the innocent child’.
The paper is based on an 18-month multimodal ethnography in an inner London borough with ten
children, aged between five and ten years old. who had experienced domestic abuse and social work
interventions. I use the analytical framework offered by cultural theories of everyday life, as well as the
works of decolonial and feminist scholars, to analyse my data and to generate thick descriptions.
The paper concludes that it is important to address this epistemic injustice by researching the everyday
with children who have experienced domestic abuse. In doing so we can challenge the patriarchal and
colonial social order that pathologize and dehumanise children. I theorise how in not decolonising
research with children, we (un)intentionally uphold a colonial social order and promotes a figure of the
child that further endangers the embodied child.


Finding Family across Borders: Challenges and Insights from International Kinship Placements
Sara Bellamio
(Lancaster University)
This project explores the challenges associated with placing looked-after children with family across
borders. In England, when children require out-of-home care, local authorities are required to prioritise
family placements. However, identifying and assessing relatives becomes significantly more complex
when families and potential caregivers live abroad. According to Children and Families Across Borders
(CFAB, 2024), a London-based organisation providing case management services in cross-border child
protection cases, the number of children placed in kinship care abroad rose by 71% between 2020 and
2022, reaching 192 children. Despite this increase, cross-border placements still represent only 1% of
all children in care, suggesting that many more could be eligible, as 37% of recent births in England
and Wales have at least one foreign-born parent (ONS, 2024).
Research remains limited on how practitioners navigate complex international legal and statutory
frameworks to ensure best-interest decisions for children whose family resources extend beyond UK
borders. This PhD project addresses this gap through a mixed-methods design. Stage one involves
analysis of aggregated case data provided by CFAB, while stage two consists of semi-structured
interviews with family justice professionals, including CAFCASS children’s guardians, CFAB
caseworkers, and lawyers representing children and parents in cross-border cases.
By combining quantitative and qualitative data, the study integrates empirical evidence with practitioner
perspectives, emphasises children’s rights, and seeks to inform policy and practice. Ultimately, it aims
to improve decision-making and protections for children with transnational family connections.




                                                     42
                         British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                          University of Manchester
                                                                                 Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                       Paper Session 2
                                                                                           11:00-12:30
Disney from the Periphery: Indonesian Lower Income Families Experiencing Disney
Filipus Wicaksono
(University of Surrey)
For lower-income families in Indonesia, Disney occupies a paradoxical position in contemporary
childhood: it is marketed as universal family entertainment, yet Disney+ Hotstar subscription and
cinema ticket costs remain economically inaccessible to many lower-income households. While
theoretical research on Disney is extensive, little is known about how families from the Global South
who exists on the economic periphery access and experience Disney. This paper draws on
observational “text-in-action” and semi-structured with 20 families (n=60) in Yogyakarta, Indonesia, as
part of my PhD thesis on how parents from the Global South navigate Disney. This paper situates
Disney within the frames of inequality and family practices, wherein the global media is consumed within
the confined spaces of single-room dwelling and small screens, away from traditional co-viewing. I
argue that lower-income families creatively mobilise informal, even “illegal”, practices to overcome
structural economic exclusion from accessing global children’s media. Faced with concerns over free
online children’s media, parents reframe piracy as a moral act being a “good parent”, enabling their
children to access what they widely perceived as good cultural capital. The children, meanwhile,
creatively reconstruct Disney narratives from fragmented clips on social media, demonstrating their
agency in navigating limited access. Their practices highlight how inequality, morality, and global
children’s media are lived and negotiated in everyday family life.


Ghostly Siblinghood: Children’s Sibling Relations under China’s Changing Population Policies
Jianyu Li
(University of Manchester)
The one-child policy (1979-2015) dominated the lives of Chinese families for nearly four decades and
profoundly reshaped kinship relations, including through the official erasure of siblinghood. Multi-child
families, whether permitted or concealed, nonetheless continue to exist, even if children’s own accounts
of sibling relations during this period remained marginalised. With the partial relaxation of the policy in
later years, when families were once again allowed multiple children, children’s own understandings
and practices of siblinghood have emerged as an essential but underexplored area of inquiry.
Based on semi-structured interviews and focus group discussions with Chinese children aged 13 to 17
who grew up under shifting population policies, this paper will explore how children’s narratives reveal
the existence of siblings who appeared as ghostly figures, unexpected, invisible, imagined, or only
encountered during brief reunions. These accounts also address an ongoing tension between idealised
sibling ties and lived experiences, generating uncanny and unsettled feelings towards brothers and
sisters.
The paper will argue that shifting population policies reshaped not only the possibility of having siblings,
but also the very meaning of siblinghood. Informed by Susie Scott’s work on the sociology of nothing,
it will demonstrate how sibling relations are defined as much by absence, silence and invisibility as by
presence. By exploring how state regulation is woven into the most intimate of family ties, this paper
concludes that absence and ghostliness are not gaps in siblinghood in contemporary China, but rather
are constitutive features of it.



Families & Relationships 2 - Room 4.209
In Pursuit of Status Equality: The Social Power of Money and the Organisation of Wealth within
Couples
Liz Mann
(University College Cork and London School of Economics and Political Science)

Sociology has a long history of engaging in the study of money and income in couples, and places
heavy emphasis on the symbolic nature and social meaning of money. However, this important literature
has been neglected in studies of wealth and its distribution, where wealth is widely regarded as a
                                                     43
                         British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                          University of Manchester
                                                                                  Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                        Paper Session 2
                                                                                            11:00-12:30
household characteristic. Similarly, the money in couples literature has paid limited attention to the
organisation of assets and debts. In this paper, I consider the symbolic nature of money and what it
means for the organisation of assets and debts within couples. I draw on interviews with 35 individuals
who currently live with their partner or spouse, aged 25-50 and resident in the UK. I introduce the
concepts of ‘status equality’, ‘performative equality’ and ‘conditional sharing’ which each in their own
way serve to limit sharing of assets and debts, allowing inequalities of wealth to accumulate between
partners. I further observe participants widely reported valuing independence, but with gendered
narratives, often reinforcing individualised approaches to assets and debts. In contrast, some
participants use sharing of money and income to signal their ‘togetherness’, but this seems to be
facilitated by similar economic resources. Taken together these findings emphasise the ways in which
the symbolic nature of money can affect the accumulation of assets and debts within couples, and
points towards the need for greater interrogation of assumptions of equal sharing of household wealth.


Couple-Defiant Intimacies: Experiencing Space, State and Citizenship outside the Couple Norm
Leehee Rothschild
(Manchester Metropolitan University)
In this presentation I introduce the umbrella-term couple-defiant intimacies, which could serve as an
analytical category, by which alternative intimacies that destabilise the couple norm could be
conceptiualised and theorised together. Academic scholarship on intimacies and sexualities has
recognised the centrality of the couple norm, compulsory romance and mononormativity to the design
of contemporary intimacies and families. It further acknowledged the ensuing importance of
investigating together multiple types of intimacies, which are in tension with them and the lack of
terminologies by which these intimacies can be grouped and researched together. The term couple-
defiant intimacies is an attempt to address this gap.
The presentation is based on my PhD, a qualitative research, featuring virtual interviews with 24 Israeli
adults (carried prior to the genocide in Gaza), relationship maps and legal textual analysis, wherein
couple-defiant intimacies was used to encompass polyamorous constellations, solo-polyamorists,
polyfidelitous triads, co-parenting units and friendships as life-partnerships. It illustrates that these
intimacies share similar experiences of citizenship, spatiality and biopolitics, which makes it valuable to
examine them together. I will show, for example, that they are all subjected to different forms of
marignalisation resulting from epistemic and material erasure by the state, whose policies are structured
around the (‘properly’-racialised) couple. Likewise, they are marginalised by the architecture and design
of living spaces, which are directed towards the nuclear family. The consideration of these intimacies
through the category of couple-defiant intimacies can depart from neoliberal identity politics and steer
their discussion towards social structures instead of particular experiences.



Families & Relationships 3 - Room 4.211
Relational Radicalisation: The Consequences of QAnon
Rian Mulcahy, Jessica Simpson
(University of Greenwich)
Conventional accounts of radicalisation have too often framed it as an individual and linear trajectory
culminating in extremist behaviours. Within this framework, families are simply positioned as buffers,
risk factors and even informants. We believe this lens is limiting as it not only ties the concept to broader
security agendas but overlooks how radicalisation is experienced within everyday relationships. We
argue that radicalisation should be understood instead as a relational process with relational
consequences - a claim developed more fully in our forthcoming book, The Hidden Pandemic:
Relational Consequences of QAnon (Emerald, 2026).
Drawing on over 2,000 testimonies from r/QAnonCasualties, this paper centres the lived experiences
of Social Network Clusters - the families, partners, and friends of QAnon believers. For them,
conspiratorial belief was experienced as radicalisation, not because it necessarily produced violence,
but because it reordered family life. Testimonies describe estrangement between spouses, children
severing ties with parents, gendered burdens of care, grief for the “living ghost,” and, in some cases,
                                                    44
                        British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                         University of Manchester
                                                                               Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                     Paper Session 2
                                                                                         11:00-12:30
the intensification of coercion and abuse. And yet, against this backdrop, we found SNCs forging coping
infrastructures, with online forums functioning as affective publics and survival communities.
We argue therefore that treating radicalisation simply as a march toward violence and extremism is to
miss its most immediate and relational effects: the grief, burdens, and ruptures borne by loved ones.
And while QAnon is our case study, the framework of relational radicalisation can extend further; to
anti-vaccine movements, incel forums, and other sites where belief reorganises intimacy.


Feminist Constructions of Fatherhood Played out on Mumsnet?
Andrew Baron, Charlotte Barrow
(University of Lancashire)
Any conceptual and empirical assessment of the quintessence of contemporary fatherhood needs to
be understood in relation to its symbiotic relationship both to masculinity and motherhood. For several
decades research studies have explored the social formations and transitions of these identities,
revealing complex dynamics of continuity and transformation (Handley, 2023).
Our study applies a ‘feminist critical discourse analysis’ approach to investigate the social media forum
Mumsnet to identify women’s perceptions of how fatherhood is performed in the domestic sphere.
Studies of male narratives on fatherhood have highlighted the nuanced process of how hegemonic
masculinity resiliently still influences paternal identities, yet simultaneously new ‘softened’ forms of
masculinity within fatherhood practices are emerging too, weakening traditional gendered divisions of
labour within the private sphere (Williams, 2008).
Research exploring female accounts of the motherhood - fatherhood interplay within the family, highlight
how separate, imbalanced divisions of childcare, domestic and emotional labour are displayed, with
women disproportionately burdened with this work (Ehrstein, 2022).
We reveal how Mumsnet voices debate the reality of symmetrical family relations versus the continued
entrenchment of domestic ‘triple shift’ labour inequality for women. These voices explore, engage and
contest hegemonic notions of fatherhood affirming a feminist praxis for the household domain.
Therefore, we need to assert the importance of the argument, that fathering is a political issue
(Silverstein, 1996).


Non-Serious Relationships: Gender, Class, and Technology in Modern India
Parul Bhandari
(University of Cambridge)
Since long studies on marriage in India, typically try to locate ‘love’ in the process and discourse of
marriage, especially to make an argument of a ‘modern’ self. Equally, the past few years has witnessed
a growing interest in the study of intimacies amongst college-going adults or young professionals, to
understand their conception of marriage and trace transformations and dissent (class caste, religion).
This paper too concerns itself with these debates on love and marriage but primarily focuses on the
kind of relationship that has not been given much attention in the context of South Asia, namely, non-
serious relationships. Demographers note a push at age at marriage especially amongst urban Indians.
In this paper, I bring attention to what demographers call the ‘elongated phase of singlehood’, where
urban Indians are not looking to marry but simply experience a range of intimacies especially
relationships that do not translate into marriage and when they are not in love. In this ‘new’ reckoning,
I explain the role that technology plays especially in the form of dating apps. I draw attention to the
growing leisure and pleasure industry to understand the self-fashioning of urban Indians as modern and
their desire to experience non-serious relationships. These, I argue, are important everyday intimacies
which informs their gender and class identities.




                                                   45
                       British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                        University of Manchester
                                                                                    Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                          Paper Session 2
                                                                                              11:00-12:30

Lifecourse - Room 4.213
Becoming a VIP: Characteristics and Impact of Significant People in the Lives of Scottish Youth
Dalia Avello-Vega
(University of Edinburgh)
Research on the impact that significant others have throughout childhood often focuses on adult-child
relationships and their protective roles in the context of adversity. Less is known about the temporal
and transformative roles that significant adults can play throughout childhood in the context of youth
flourishing, a state of feeling well, functioning effectively and leading a meaningful and fulfilling life. This
study, known to participants as “My V.I.P. Scotland”, aims to explore how relationships with their
nominated VIPs emerged, evolved and influenced their lives over time. Using data from the Growing
Up in Scotland birth cohort study (GUS), this project examines the impact that parental and non-parental
adults have on adolescent flourishing. A subsample of GUS birth cohort members (N=22), now
emerging adults, was interviewed to explore and retrospectively map what they considered to be the
most influential relationships and events in their lives. The participants reflect on their perceived
differences in the impact of caregivers in traditional two-parent households, discuss the significant roles
that non-parental and non-familial adults can play in the lives of children growing up in both normative
and non-normative family structures, and broaden the concept of positively influential figures to include
media content creators, literary characters, and online communities, offering a unique child-centred
view of the key factors that make a relationship significant.


Another ‘Becoming’ Bodily Experience: Redefining Menopause from Liminality Angle and Its
Implication to Workplace Wellbeing
Eun Sun Godwin, Priscilla Eke
(University of Wolverhampton)
As the number of women pursuing their careers who are going through menopause is increasing, it is
critical to understand this phenomenon appropriately to foster an inclusive workplace and society for
thriving individuals. However, there is still a dearth of studies on menopause, and those that exist tend
to focus on the ‘medical’ perspective (e.g., symptoms). In this paper, we focus on women’s experiences
during menopause and offer a conceptual framework to redefine menopause not as a discontinuous
(as the term implies) bodily experience, but as a ‘becoming’ or ‘transiting’ bodily experience, applying a
liminality angle.
This paper is based on a case study with a higher education institution (HEI) in the UK. The data were
collected through focus groups, interviews, and panel discussions with 32 staff members across three
campuses. The study explored individuals' perceptions and experiences, as well as the collective
narrative on the impact of menopause on their workability and career.
Our initial findings reveal that many women see their bodily experiences of menopause as a ‘process
of changes’ rather than a ‘pausing’ experience, which reshapes their identity as a woman and as a
worker. Our participants’ menopause experiences greatly resemble the liminal process of the ‘transition’
of girls from puberty to adulthood. We hence conceptualise menopause as another ‘becoming’ process
based on liminality concept, redefining menopause as a positive and celebrative stage of life. This will
offer valuable insights not only to the sociological theorisation of menopause but also to the relevant
workplace and government policy.


Topographies and Temporalities of Loss and Hope: Examining More-than-Human Generations
In and Through Deindustrialised Landscapes
Melanie Lovatt, Rozemarijn De Kwaasteniet, Hannah Spruce, Susan Watkins
(University of Stirling)
This paper explores generational dynamics and their related emotions in deindustrialised landscapes
across Europe. We present data from ethnographic research conducted at four case study sites
(Austria, Germany, Romania, Scotland) as part of the project “Waste/Land/Futures – Intergenerational
                                                       46
                           British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                            University of Manchester
                                                                                 Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                       Paper Session 2
                                                                                           11:00-12:30
relations in places of abandonment and renewal across Europe” (funded by VolkswagenStiftung, 2024-
2028). Through their histories of change, abandonment and renewal, deindustrialised landscapes are
often marked by distinct emotional topographies (Hastrup et al, 2010), which might foreground feelings
of loss, longing, and nostalgia (Meier, 2016) but also feelings of hope and utopian thinking (Burningham
and Venn, 2025). What has remained underexplored so far is how these emotions might both build on
and reproduce (inter)generational dynamics. Younger generations often leave deindustrialised areas in
hopes of better job opportunities elsewhere, leaving behind older adults whose lives become closely
tied to the area's story of loss and decline. We ask how conceptualising generations as not only human
but as co-constituted through humans and the more-than-human temporalities, materialities, and
ecological dynamics of deindustrialised environments can 1) advance understandings of what
generations mean, and 2) complicate binary narratives of progress and decline or conflict and solidarity
in the context of place and (inter)generational relations.


Co-constructed Spaces between Adolescents and Non-parental Figures: Debates around
Agency and Vulnerability
Johanna Quina
(University of Leeds)
In this presentation, I will discuss one of the themes I developed based on a qualitative, exploratory,
and participatory study conducted with young people aged 13 to 17 in Quito, Ecuador. I explored their
perceptions of contemporary adolescence and mental health. Using relational materialism and
approaches from childhood studies, I analyze the social networks in which adolescents are embedded.
One of the most important relationships is with non-parental adults. Few studies in the literature address
these relationships or their impact on the lives of children and adolescents. In this study, I learned from
the participants’ experiences about the significance of non-parental adults in their lives, including
coaches, teachers, psychologists, and older relatives, among others. However, the relevance of these
relationships lies more in the co-construction of shared spaces with these adults than in the adults
themselves. This includes the research space created with the participants, which also had a positive
impact on their experience. This presentation aims to review the relationships between adults and
young people. In a world where there are more shared spaces, it is worth considering youth from an
intergenerational perspective that rethinks the power relations that limit or enable mutual and shared
agency. It also aims to reflect, as academics, on the spaces we open to work with young populations
and the role of the adult researcher when considering young people as participants and/or vulnerable
populations. These are valuable discussions to nourish the field of Childhood Studies and other
disciplines.



Medicine, Health & Illness - Room 3.209
The Importance of Friends for Young People Navigating the Work of Contracepting
Marie Larsson
(University of Edinburgh)

This paper addresses the often-overlooked role of friends in young people's sexual and reproductive
health, particularly in what I term the work of contracepting. Previous researchers have critiqued the
marginalisation of friendship in this domain (Budgeon, 2006; Roseneil, 2004; Roseneil and Budgeon,
2004). As Byron notes, research on sexual health typically fails to engage with young people's friendship
cultures (2017, 488), viewing peer relationships primarily through the lens of peer pressure and as
something to be mistrusted.
This paper contributes to the growing call to acknowledge and explore the complex roles friends play
in sexual and reproductive health. I draw on the stories generated from 27 in-depth interviews with 13
women, men, and non-binary people aged 18 to 29, with different sexual identities living in Sweden,
and who had some experience with pregnancy and/or STI prevention.
I will illustrate how friends can act as co-explorers, co-educators, playmates, practical helpers and
guides in navigating the work of contracepting. Additionally, I will explore the relational factors enabling

                                                    47
                        British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                         University of Manchester
                                                                                 Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                       Paper Session 2
                                                                                           11:00-12:30
these roles, while acknowledging the dual nature of friends' influence, which can be both caring and
controlling. This analysis aims to shed light on the nuanced roles of friendship in this context and its
implications for young people's sexual and reproductive health and wellbeing. Finally, without
romanticising the power of friendship, I suggest there is cause for optimism about the role friends and
friendly communities play for young people in doing the work of contracepting, which deserves more
attention in research, policy and healthcare.


Geographies of Response-ability: How Social Relations Shape the Messy Terrain of (Digital)
Contraception
Cecily Klim
(University of New South Wales)

From tracking apps and wearables, to “smart” condoms, hormonal profiling, and implantable
microchips, this paper examines the emerging landscape of digital contraceptive technologies. Femtech
companies leading this development pride their technologies for being user-led and for meeting several
user-defined contraceptive priorities, such as non-hormonal, non-invasive, and user-controlled.
However, these claims have been met with considerable scepticism and criticism, particularly from
health professionals who question their effectiveness for pregnancy prevention while highlighting new
concerns around safety, security, and privacy.
Presenting findings from two interrelated studies conducted as part of my doctoral research—an online
document analysis of diverse sources related to digital contraceptives, and creative qualitative
workshops with potential users—I argue that, despite competing claims, the affordances of these
devices are not necessarily as important as the social relations that shape their emergence and
stabilisation. Situating digital contraceptives within these relations repositions claims about benefits and
risks less as questions of technical efficacy, and more so as reflections of broader struggles over power,
agency, and responsibility.
To understand these dynamics, I empirically map the entanglement of actors implicated in the digital
contraceptive landscape, including Femtech companies, healthcare professionals, users, social media
influencers, pharmaceutical firms, regulators, and governments. I unsettle common assumptions about
‘who’ is responsible by showing how power and agency are not fixed attributes but are relationally
enacted and continually reconfigured. In highlighting these shifting geographies of responsibility—or
response-ability—I point to the importance of, and potential for, more collective and inclusive
approaches to both digital and nondigital contraceptive care.


Troubling 'Non-compliance' to Weight-loss Advice: A Critical Policy Study of BMI Restrictions
on NHS-IVF
Rebecca Muir
(Queen Mary University of London)
The majority of Integrated Care Boards in England exclude women with a Body Mass Index (BMI) of
>30 from NHS-funded IVF treatment. The medical and ethical rationales behind restrictions have been
questioned and qualitative work has found restrictions create emotional, social, and moral burdens for
excluded women.
This qualitative study employs Bacchi's What's the Problem Represented to Be? critical policy analysis
framework to examine how BMI restrictions are constructed in policy and experienced by women
navigating NHS-IVF treatment. Analysis of national and local commissioning documents, alongside
interviews with 22 stakeholders (local policymakers, clinicians and policy stakeholders) and 12 women
affected by restrictions, reveals disconnections between policy assumptions and lived experiences.
Policy documents construct women as "empty vessels" requiring education about diet and exercise,
while positioning obesity through a mechanistic metabolic model where weight loss follows predictable
energy-balance equations. Women with BMI >30 are represented as non-compliant and too high risk
to undertake IVF.



                                                   48
                       British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                        University of Manchester
                                                                                   Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                         Paper Session 2
                                                                                             11:00-12:30
Counter-discourses challenged deficit models of health knowledge. Women described complex
emotional relationships with food, including stress eating and disordered eating patterns unaddressed
by standard advice. Additionally, policies exhibit time-blindness – while recommending that women
should gradually lose weight, policies ignore conflicting temporal pressure from NHS age restrictions
on IVF and age-related fertility decline. Some women in the study faced difficult dilemmas between
gradual, healthy weight loss and imposed treatment deadlines.
These findings demonstrate that BMI restrictions rest on flawed conceptual logics that fail to account
for complexities of weight-loss, temporal constraints, and women's existing health knowledge.



Methodological Innovations - Room 4.206
From Timelines to Poets: Maximising Data Diversity and Innovating Data Interaction
Sarah Neal
(University of Sheffield)
As Urry and Law (2003) observe, traditional social science methods are ill equipped to respond to the
multiple social realities of 21st century worlds and remind us that ‘what is known depends on
perspective’ (2003: 6). Given this, the paper argues for qualitative methods assemblages (Baker and
McGuirk 2016), empirical design that is committed to providing a variety vantage points through which
to access and bring together the heterogenous, multi-dimensionalities of contemporary social life. It
also seeks to build on participatory approaches to data generation and interaction through creative
engagements with qualitative datasets that emerge from complex social worlds.
Synthesising the experience of two research projects, Just Turn Up: Informal Sport and Social
Participation in the Superdiverse City (ESRC) and Living Brexit in Rural Britain (Leverhulme Trust), the
paper situates these arguments in two distinct moments in the qualitative process in each project. The
first moment considers the innovations in data interaction on the JTU project and discusses the ways
in which the project worked with ‘poets in residence’ as a strategy to open up data about everyday
urban leisure practices to novel forms of interaction and creative re/interpretation. The second moment
focuses on the Living Brexit project’s efforts to design in pluralist strategies for dynamically engaging
interlocutors and listening well. It will focus specifically on the experience of generating data diversity in
combining group-based interviews with individual biographic-place timelines as inventive routes for
discussing the politically sensitive themes of Brexit, migration and social change in rural places.


Measuring Economic Insecurity Using Digital Trace Data: A Computational Approach to
Measure Labor Market Conditions
Ubeyd Oktem
(Koç University)
Over the past decade, there has been a notable increase in both academic and public literature on the
growing insecurities stemming from shifts in labor market relations across various regions. This surge
in attention reflects the decline in labor market standards, often conceptualized as precarious
employment and economic insecurity, which carries profound negative implications for individuals and
societies. While existing research has largely examined these dynamics through survey-based
approaches, this study advances the field by shifting the focus toward subjective perceptions of
insecurity as expressed on social media. In doing so, it contributes to the measurement of labor market
conditions by showing how digital traces can capture lived experiences of economic insecurities as a
complement to conventional survey data.
To this end, this research examines subjective perceptions of economic insecurity in Turkey by
analyzing discourse on X (formerly Twitter) from 2016 to 2024. It introduces a computational framework
employing natural language processing to classify individual posts, which are then aggregated to the
user level. Subsequently, the framework applies poststratification techniques (MRP) over known
demographic and spatial characteristics to generate population-representative indices.


                                                    49
                        British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                         University of Manchester
                                                                                Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                      Paper Session 2
                                                                                          11:00-12:30
The study provides empirical insights into Turkey’s case, where a series of economic, political, and
social shocks over the past decade have heightened the salience of insecurity. It also contributes
methodologically by demonstrating the potential of digital trace data for assessing labor market
conditions, particularly as survey research faces rising costs, temporal limitations, and a growing crisis
in measuring public opinion and subjective perceptions.



Race, Ethnicity & Migration 1 - Room 2.217
Institutional Efforts to Address the Past: The Church, Slavery and Discourses of Protection
Bethany Elce
(University of Lincoln)
In recent years, from both overseas and at home, calls for the Church of England (CofE) to address its
history of involvement with transatlantic chattel slavery have grown louder and more persistent. In 2023
the CofE published research on the history of its major funding body, the Church Commissioners
charity. Their research findings revealed that the charity’s predecessor fund had invested in and
received income from the South Sea Company which transported and traded enslaved African people.
Additionally, increasing numbers of churches and cathedrals have been taking stock of their monuments
and memorials with links to chattel slavery with some seeking, and others achieving, removal of these
items from church buildings. This paper is drawn from a project which uses ethnographic methods to
examine what it looks like for a national institution to reckon with colonial pasts, and questions whether
such an engagement can help create a more racially just present and future. The CofE serves as an
important case study because of its historic and contemporary proximity to the British state and because
of its ambitious claims for what its project of reckoning can achieve. Here, I present some analysis of
interviews with church leaders who have taken action in regards to slavery linked artifacts in their
churches. As I examine some of the reasons given for initiating this work in local parish churches, I
argue that starting points do indeed shape, and may also limit, the anti-racist potential of such efforts
to reckon with the legacies of slavery.


Indigenous Queer Narratives and Social Movements in Taiwan: Storytelling, Affect, and the
Politics of Self
Ting-Sian Liu
(London School of Economics and Political Science)

Taiwan has achieved legal reforms in both Indigenous rights and queer rights through social movements
since the democratisation in the 1980s. In 2016, Taiwanese President Tsai Ing-Wen formally apologised
to Taiwan’s Indigenous peoples on 1st August and promised to lead the Indigenous Historical Justice
and Transitional Justice Committee. In 2019, Taiwan became the first country in Asian to legalize same-
sex marriage. While Indigenous queer people have been actively participating in these movements,
their lived experiences are often absent from mainstream narratives. Over the past two decades,
Indigenous queer people in Taiwan have developed ways to articulate their experiences that challenge
racism, sexism, and sexual discrimination and build communities across Taiwan.
In this paper, I examine how Indigenous queer organizers in Taiwan engage in advocacy work through
strategies that foreground affect, storytelling, and self-making. Through analyzing their narratives, I
explore how they challenge Han settler colonialism while deepening decolonial practice that rooted in
communal care. I argue that affective storytelling, rooted in Indigenous epistemologies, serves as an
advocacy tool that enables Han-Taiwanese settlers to rethink ethnic privilege, Indigeneity, and the
possibility of solidarity-building.
This research draws qualitative data, including 19 in-depth interviews with queer Indigenous organizers,
9 in-depth interviews with Han-Taiwanese queers, participant observation at Indigenous events and
queer events from December 2024 to September 2025, and secondary data from online interviews and
podcasts. Through exploring Indigenous queers’ experience in social movements, this research seeks
to complicate the discussion of Taiwanese queer activism through the lens of race, ethnicity, and
decoloniality.

                                                      50
                          British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                           University of Manchester
                                                                                  Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                        Paper Session 2
                                                                                            11:00-12:30

Race, Ethnicity & Migration 2 - Room 2.218
Understanding State Violence and Resistance in Police Pursuit Killings
Siobhan O’Neill
(University of Manchester)
Racially minoritised and working-class communities continue to be overpoliced and underprotected in
the UK. At the sharpest end of policing, in the last ten years alone, there have been more than 2,309
‘deaths during or following police contact’. Reflecting wider patterns of policing, police killings are
racially disproportionate. Police pursuit killings are a specific form of state violence that is under-
researched and under-considered. This paper begins to address this gap by shining a spotlight on
police pursuit killings. It attempts to make sense of this form of state violence by focussing in on the
stories of three boys who died in the same year (2021) following police pursuits by Greater Manchester
Police. Through an exploration of their stories and this specific type of state violence, I outline how their
lives were ‘blackened’, rendered disposable, devalued and treated as ungrievable by the police and the
state. I explore this process at different stages: in the moments of violence; through re-presentation and
in the slow violence in the aftermath, specifically in the coronial inquest process. I argue, therefore, that
police pursuit killings should be understood in the wider context of domestic colonialism which
maximalises the precarity of racially minoritised and working-class communities. Through these stories,
I also argue that resistance and solidarity is built beyond identity politics at the intersection of race and
class. This paper, therefore, extends sociological knowledge of state violence and police killings and
highlights how coloniality persists in contemporary policing practices.


“Do not feel bad for me. I'm a fucking badass you know”: Displaced Students’ Narratives of Self-
identity
Alessia Dalceggio
(London Metropolitan University)
This paper draws on a study conducted with 21 university students who have lived experience of forced
migration. In discussing their journey through university, many participants found that, while they
primarily understood displacement as an experience, others saw it as an embodied identity. This clash
of understandings caused tension for participants; even in spaces like universities, the identifier
‘refugee’ almost always carried negative assumptions, perceptions and prejudices, including hightened
vulnerability and helplessness. Through participants’ narratives of the self, this paper explores how
participants reflected on their intersectional identities and experience of forced migration to push back,
reclaim or redefine the boundaries of ‘being a refugee’.


Decolonial Futures: From Subalternity to Epistemologies of Resistance
Sneha Sabale
(Gokhale Institute of Poltics and Economics)

In the past 75 years of sociology and sociological theory, sociology has critically examined inequality
while the discipline's canons of theorising have continued to create silences around marginal forms of
knowing. Subaltern Studies inhibited researchers and academics from thinking about the silencing of
voices from below in analysis, but often only brought description rather than interrogation, as colonial
sociologies had done before. Similarly, the decolonial turn that originated from Latin American and
African places have attempted to interrogate the coloniality of race and empire, even while often
prescribing or universalising the conceptual frameworks of coloniality through race and empire, while
marginalising caste and other forms of hierarchies beyond the Western experience.
In this paper I suggest that sociology must go from discussing exclusion to putting epistemologies of
resistance at the centre of inquiry--the kind of knowledges that can emerge from the struggles of people
who have been marginalised.
By bringing subalternity and decoloniality together here I am attempting to re-imagine the futures of the
discipline of sociology. The argument made here proposes a methodological shift from investigating the
                                                    51
                        British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                         University of Manchester
                                                                                 Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                       Paper Session 2
                                                                                           11:00-12:30
"margins" as an object of study, to theorising with "margins" as theorists and producers of knowledge.
This paper does this while contributing to global conversations around epistemic justice, challenging
and disrupting inherited blind-spots of the discipline, and signalling pathways for building pluralist and
decolonial sociologies that are in-tune with multiple histories of anti-colonial and anti-caste resistance.



Race, Ethnicity & Migration 3 - Room 2.219
Between Colonial Violence and Anti-colonial Subversion: Assembling Durham University’s
Colonial History
Sol Gamsu
(Durham University)
This paper explores the history of Durham University as a site for both preparing and perpetrating
colonial violence but also a place in which anti-colonial resistance has been fostered. To frame these
contradictions we draw on la paperson’s (2017) argument that the university is an assemblage of
different and contradictory machinery. We explore this through an analysis of a selection of student
newspaper articles from 1948-1994 to examine how race and colonialism and the specific links between
the University and the British Empire were viewed and discussed by students. We find certain repeating
themes – senior university administrators and academics embedded within the declining colonial project
of British Empire, a minority of anti-colonial academics, conservative students debating empire and
questions of race in ways that reinforced racism and colonial violence, the voices of international
students pushing back against this, student campaigns for solidarity with Algeria, South Africa and
Palestine, the persistent white gaze of middle-class students abroad and an extensive discussion of
race in music and film. These contradictory forces raise questions of how or whether the university can
ever be ‘decolonized’ but allow us to trace an anti-colonial politics even in a provincial, white middle-
class and historically conservative university.


Flowing between In(visibility): Intersectional Identities of East and Southeast Asian Academics
in UK High Education
Grace Gao, Mengyi Xu, Ning Xu
(Northumbria University)
East and Southeast Asian (ESA) academics in UK higher education are simultaneously understudied.
While identity scholarship has emphasised the relational and intersectional nature of identity, ESA
academics' positions are shaped by racialised, cultural, and migratory histories that are often
overlooked. This study explores how ESA academics perceive and navigate their intersectional
identities and how these shape their workplace experiences. Drawing on the visibility–invisibility–
hypervisibility framework (Lewis & Simpson, 2012), we examine how identity operates fluidly and
simultaneously as both a site of constraint and a resource for agency. Through 40 semi-structured
interviews conducted across a Russell Group research-intensive university and a post-92 teaching-
intensive university, encompassing different disciplines, contract types, and career stages, we reveal
how participants actively shift between visibility states through purposeful identity performances,
amplifying presence to counter invisibility, strategically withdrawing to mitigate hypervisibility, or pre-
emptively projecting particular identities to shape how they are seen. We thus further reconceptualize
these visibility forms not merely as constraints imposed upon minoritized subjects, but as strategic
resources for identity work and workplace navigation. This reframing reveals the sophisticated, often
invisible, labor that minoritized academics perform to navigate structural inequalities, while showing
how agency operates even within constrained circumstances. By linking visibility fluidity to identity
fluidity, we demonstrate how intersectional identities function simultaneously as sites of marginalization
and as resources for resistance, offering a more nuanced understanding of how power, identity, and
agency intersect in organizational contexts. We conclude by calling for HE institutions to design EDI
policies responsive to this group's specific challenges.




                                                   52
                       British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                        University of Manchester
                                                                                  Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                        Paper Session 2
                                                                                            11:00-12:30
Migrant Health and Integration in the UK: Prolonged Waiting Times, Hostile Environment and
Anti-Migrant Rhetoric
Erdem Dikici
(University of the West of England, Bristol)

Studies on migrant integration often focus on legal status, labour market activities, or social integration,
with a scarce emphasis on the role of health and wellbeing. There remains a limited attention to how
structural and political stressors influence not just the mental health and wellbeing but also the
processes of integration. Drawing on qualitative interviews with asylum seekers, refugees and migrants
in the UK, this paper examines how two key stressors-prolonged waiting times in the asylum system
and rising anti-immigrant rhetoric-pose significant challenges to both mental health and integration into
the society. The findings show that “asylum backlog” has emerged as a key source of distress with
prolonged waiting times exacerbating anxiety and depression while at the same time extending legal
uncertainty, delaying access to employment and stable housing–key aspects of integration. This
system-led limbo status both undermine individual health and affect families, further deepening
individual isolation and social exclusion. Compounding this, the findings also show how increasingly
hostile political and social environment, particularly mounting anti-immigrant political rhetoric and violent
protests, both re-traumatizes already vulnerable populations and impede their integration process.
Participants report feeling targeted and devalued, which nurtures fear, isolation and mistrust, thereby,
hinder the process of developing a sense of belonging. Based on these insights, the paper concludes
that more nuanced research is needed on the broader effects of anti-immigrant, far right politics on the
health, wellbeing, and integration of migrant populations, which requires a sociological approach that
attends to the temporal and political determinants shaping migrant lives.


Displaced Brokers: How Displaced People Shape Humanitarianism in an Era of Fragmented
Protection
Aminath Nisha Zadhy-Cepoglu
(University of Leeds)
This paper foregrounds a specific cadre of people displaced due to conflict: those employed or
volunteering in formal and informal roles in humanitarian organisations. In doing so, it offers new
insights into how displaced individuals, often in ambiguous legal situations, who are excluded from
political activism and civic participation, mobilise for broader rights and protection of displaced people.
Preliminary data drawn from in-depth interviewing and audio diaries of displaced Syrians and Afghans
in Turkey, examined through the lens of brokerage, demonstrates how they expand and constrain the
borders of the humanitarian field and considers how emerging from different contexts of conflict shapes
the collaboration or contestations of different displaced groups with each other and with humanitarian
organisations in turn. Situating displaced people in this socio-political environment invites an
understanding that they are not simply service recipients or intermediaries between humanitarian
organisations and displaced communities, but rather disruptive and (re)constructive forces in a field that
is in flux. This paper makes two key contributions: (1) it provides new data on an under-research
segment of displaced people and trace the pathways of their inclusion and exclusion within and through
the humanitarian field and (2) it foregrounds the attempts of displaced people to claim ownership of the
humanitarian field, making a theoretical contribution about the transformative negotiations of different
groups emerging from different conflict contexts and treats displaced people as experts of humanitarian
challenges and change-makers that are at the forefront of confronting the current crisis of
humanitarianism.




                                                    53
                        British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                         University of Manchester
                                                                                   Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                         Paper Session 2
                                                                                             11:00-12:30

Science, Technology & Digital Studies -
Room 3.205
Oppression through Capture: Automating Biopolitics from Punch Cards to AI
Janos Szakolczai
(University of Glasgow)
This paper explores the continuities between contemporary debates on artificial intelligence (AI) and
earlier technologies of surveillance and classification, examining how seemingly neutral systems of data
processing can become instruments of exclusion and domination. Since the mass adoption of
generative AI in 2022, platforms such as ChatGPT have been celebrated as breakthroughs in
innovation. Yet their reliance on vast datasets and the extraction of user inputs reproduces older logics
of consent, capture, and corporate power. To place these dynamics in an extreme context, I draw on
two historical case studies: Automated punch-card tabulating machines to facilitate Nazi bureaucratic
discrimination, and the role of data-driven large computational systems in South Africa’s pre-apartheid
“Book of Life,” which catalogued racial identity categories with unprecedented precision. In both cases,
data collection framed as administrative or benign underpinned infrastructures of racialised surveillance
and social control, which are today becoming central in the automation of warfare and policing.
Theoretically, I argue for a shift from understanding data as “given” (datum) to “taken” (capta)
(Szakolczai, 2023), aligning with Foucauldian and critical data studies approaches that foreground
power in processes of biopolitical measurement and classification. By situating today’s AI systems
within this genealogy, I highlight how, blinded by innovation, lax regulation and concentration of
technological ownership risk, they enable new forms of systemic discrimination. The talk invites
reflection on the sociological implications of contemporary AI: not only as a tool of efficiency or
innovation, but also as a potential infrastructure for segregation, sorting, and exclusion.


Digital Conspiracy Cultures and Intra-movement Competition in the British Extreme Right since
the August 2024 Riots
Richard Henry John Donnelly
(Kingston University London)
This paper sits at the intersection of political sociology, digital sociology and social movement studies.
I analyse how “controlled opposition” conspiracy claims circulate within the digital ecosystem of the
British extreme right and how these claims have shaped intra-movement competition in the aftermath
of the August 2024 riots. Conceptually, I extend the notion of conspiracist semiosis—the appropriation
and re-articulation of tropes from a long conspiracist tradition—to show how extreme-right actors deploy
antisemitic frames to police movement boundaries, challenge rivals and mobilise resources.
Methodologically, I combine digital ethnography with the Discourse-Historical Approach to Critical
Discourse Analysis, situating conspiracist texts within shifting strategic action fields.
Empirically, I trace a corpus that includes Nick Griffin’s online pamphlet "What Lies Behind the English
Defence League?" (2012), transcripts of recent livestreaming by the neo-Nazi Patriotic Alternative
organisation on Rumble, and the antisemitic “Tommy Robinstein” meme ecology. I show how controlled
opposition narratives are deployed by rivals to challenge Tommy Robinson’s prominence within the
British extreme right via allegations of Israeli control. Conspiracist narratives help challengers reframe
field hierarchies, exploit strategic dilemmas, and siphon activists, attention and donations.
This paper’s contribution is threefold. First, it theorises conspiracist semiosis as a form of social skill in
competitive social movement fields. Second, it demonstrates how conspiracy theories organise
coalitions and antagonisms inside the extreme right. Third, it provides a discourse-analytic approach to
understanding meme cultures, conspiracist texts and organisational rivalry. More broadly, the paper
advances a sociological account of conspiracism as social movement infrastructure, not just individual
belief.



                                                    54
                        British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                         University of Manchester
                                                                                  Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                        Paper Session 2
                                                                                            11:00-12:30
Two Tiers of Injustice: Intersecting Mythologies of Nation, Monarchy, and Economic Precarity
in Unite the Kingdom Propaganda
Ashton Kingdon, Craig Webber
(University of Southampton)
On September 13, 2025, an estimated 110-150,000 people attended the Unite the Kingdom rally in
central London, organised by far-right activist Stephen Yaxley-Lennon (Tommy Robinson), marking one
of Britain’s largest far-right demonstrations in decades. Thousands of TikTok and Instagram videos —
many AI-generated — circulated in the surrounding weeks to disseminate misinformation and mobilise
support. Through analysis of this audio-visual content, we examine how Unite the Kingdom deployed
intersecting nationalist narratives: mythologising England as the Anglosphere's ‘Mother Country’,
appropriating WWII ‘Darkest Hour’ imagery to frame immigration as an existential threat and exploiting
housing market anxieties to redirect economic grievances toward exclusionary politics. We analyse how
the propagandists instrumentalise historical symbolism — from wartime sentiment and Crown
hierarchies to medieval Crusader iconography — to legitimise elite power while deflecting attention from
structural inequality toward marginalised communities. Situating this within theoretical frameworks of
precarity, relative deprivation, and social psychology, we explore how narratives of national humiliation
embed in-group/out-group differentiation into self-fulfilling prophecies of cultural decline.



Social Divisions / Social Identities 1 -
Lecture Theatre A
When Critique Becomes Classification: Subjectivity, Power, and International Students in Elite
Universities
Kun Liang
(University of Cambridge)

What if the very vocabularies sociology developed to critique inequality, like “class,” “identity,”
“privilege”, have themselves become mechanisms of governance inside universities? This paper
explores that question through a historical analysis of higher education and ethnographic fieldwork in
UK and US elite universities, with a particular focus on international students.
Critical terms do not remain within scholarly debate. They are adopted and repurposed in admissions,
support, and diversity schemes that differentiate students (e.g. “first-generation,” “low-income,” “sexual
minorities”), while other categories are blurred into undifferentiated blocks (e.g. “international students”)
or left relatively untouched. Practices that appear to extend critique may, counter-intuitively, also
reproduce new forms of labelling and regulation, folding critical vocabularies into neoliberal and
meritocratic logics and into the culture-war pressures of the present.
International students bring transnational horizons of self-understanding that collide with these
institutional classifications. Navigating this terrain, they selectively emphasise or silence aspects of
identity, generating subjectivities through the friction between prior frameworks and new institutional
logics.
Rather than fixing conclusions, the paper opens three questions for debate: when do institutional uses
of critical categories widen critique, and when do they narrow it? How are labels taken up, sidestepped,
or reworked in everyday interaction? And what forms of subjectivity emerge as critical vocabularies
circulate between scholarship, governance, and student life? By doing so, the paper reconsiders
sociology’s own critical languages, asking how they travel, transform, and return to shape the very
subjects they seek to describe.




                                                    55
                        British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                         University of Manchester
                                                                                 Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                       Paper Session 2
                                                                                           11:00-12:30
Cast(ed) Psychosis: Prejudice, Humiliation, and the Quest for Dignity of Dalit Students in Indian
Higher Education
Dhaneswar Bhoi
(University of Edinburgh)
This paper examines caste as both a structural hierarchy and an affective system through the lenses
of the sociology of emotion and psychoanalytic theory. While caste has been extensively studied in
political, economic, and identity-based frameworks, its emotional and psychic dimensions. The study
foregrounds how caste is lived, felt, and internalised, shaping subjectivities, interpersonal relations, and
collective imaginaries.
Methodologically, the study is based on 10 case studies of Dalit students, 5 focus group discussions
(FGDs) with students across social groups, and 2 FGDs with faculty and staff, providing a multi-layered
ethnographic analysis. Findings reveal that caste discrimination is internalized, affecting self-worth,
emotional well-being, and academic confidence, often manifesting as stress, anxiety, and depressive
symptoms. Institutional silences and normalized biases compound these experiences, while students’
responses—from withdrawal to assertion—reflect ongoing psychic struggles.
The analysis highlights how humiliation, shame, resentment, and aspiration circulate within caste-
embedded spaces, producing lasting psychosocial effects. Its findings linked to Freud’s concepts of
repression and projection elucidate how unconscious anxieties and desires are displaced into caste
interactions, reinforcing social boundaries while generating psychic tension (Freud, 1923). It also
theories the findings linking Goffman’s theory of stigma further demonstrates how caste-based
discrimination is inscribed upon emotional life, regulating social participation and fostering internalised
inferiority (Goffman, 1963).
By integrating sociological and psychoanalytic perspectives, the study situates caste within lived affect
and psychic life into a theory called ‘cast(ed) psychosis’, arguing that meaningful interventions must
address both the emotional and structural dimensions of caste to support the dignity of Dalit students.


Institutional Transformation, Everyday Practices, and the Limits of Recognition
Mara Aleida Silva Hope
(University of Warwick)
This paper explores how transformation and change can be differently understood and enacted within
Equality, Diversity and Inclusion (EDI) work in higher education, based on an institutional ethnography
of a UK university. I argue that while transformation could be framed as a visible, institutional goal that
articulates itself by metrics, awards, and recognition schemes, change is experienced more diffusely in
everyday practices, negotiations, and actions that sustain EDI work.
I propose that transformation should not be reduced to the attainment of fixed outcomes but instead
understood as a process that is made possible by the cumulative and often overlooked changes that
exceed institutional forms of measurement. Drawing on the experiences of participants who describe
how initiatives that enable change frequently spill over the categories required by formal applications,
raising questions about where these practices permeate to, how they circulate, and whether they must
become institutionalised in order to “count”.
By reflecting on what people working on EDI understand transformation to mean, and why frustration
often emerges in the process of translating everyday practices into institutional outcomes, this paper
highlights the tensions between lived feminist labour and the bureaucratic logics of recognition.
Rethinking the possibilities and limits of feminist transformation in higher education.




                                                   56
                       British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                        University of Manchester
                                                                                  Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                        Paper Session 2
                                                                                            11:00-12:30
Middle-Class Anxiety in China: Understanding Educational Practices through the Lens of
Habitus and Illusio
Yu Feng
(University of Manchester)
This study examines how education has become a significant site of social anxiety for China’s middle
class. The Chinese middle class has expanded rapidly and been recognised as important in China’s
societal development. Yet in recent years, this growth has been accompanied by rising insecurity and
anxiety, with education emerging as the most salient concern.
Existing research has considered the behaviours, expectations, and anxieties of middle-class parents
within educational settings. While valuable, such studies remain confined to the parent–child
perspective and do not provide a systematic, conceptual analysis of general social anxiety experienced
by the middle class. In particular, the link between educational anxiety and insecurity over social status
remains underexplored.
Building on Hunt’s (1999) concept of social anxiety and Bourdieu’s notions of habitus and illusio, this
paper develops an analytical framework tailored to the Chinese context. Drawing on 39 in-depth
interviews with members of the occupational middle class in Shunde, Guangdong Province, it suggests
that educational anxiety is not merely a personal or parental concern but constitutes a form of social
anxiety closely intertwined with class and intersecting social structures. The analysis shows that first-
generation middle class, shaped by experiences of upward mobility, have developed a class habitus
that positions education as the central pathway to social achievement. This habitus shapes their
parental educational practices including an intensive investment in and commitment to education that
exemplifies Bourdieu’s concept of illusio. Combined with the uncertainty of educational returns, this
amplifies the educational anxiety experienced by the middle class.



Social Divisions / Social Identities 2 - Room 1.218
Special Event
The Gendering of Sociology and the Sociology of Gender
Sue Scott, Stevi Jackson, Jeff Hearn, Mary Holmes, Radhika Govinda, Finn MacKay
(Newcastle University / University of Helsinki, University of York, University of Hudderfield / Hanken
School of Economics / Örebro University, University of Edinburgh, University of the West of England)
This panel, chaired by Sue Scott, will interrogate the sometimes-contested history of the concept of
gender, within and beyond sociology, a concept that was absent from sociology 75 years ago, but which
has had an interesting history in the ensuing period. We will explore the emergence and development
of gender as a sociological concept, assessing the uses of its academic precursors such as Sex Roles
and Sexual Divisions. We will then focus on the part played by feminism in the creation of space within
the BSA, and UK sociology more widely, for research on women and for feminist critique. This will lead
into discussion of the way in which the sociology of women evolved into the sociology of gender, with
an emphasis on gender as a social division, as well as the development of the sociology of masculinities.
While gender originated as an analytical concept, which challenged essentialist and biologistic
assumptions about women and men, it became, in everyday parlance, a mere synonym for sex thus
depriving it of its critical import. More recently it has been re-identified as critical in a negative sense;
with the emergence of ‘anti-gender’ movements associated with the resurgence of the political right
across the world, gender has been branded as a dangerous concept. There has also been an
association of gender with gender identity and contestation of the sex-gender distinction, particularly in
the context of, often ferocious, political debates on trans rights. The panel will analyse these shifts and
evaluate their consequences for the sociology of gender and for gender divisions in social life. Overall,
the aim of the Panel will be to make the case for the importance of a distinctively sociological approach
to gender and also the particular value of sociology for making sense of social and cultural changes,
political trends and of continued inequalities and injustices. It is important that an event such as this
includes presenters from different generations and with differing relationships to both the sociology of


                                                    57
                        British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                         University of Manchester
                                                                                    Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                          Paper Session 2
                                                                                              11:00-12:30
gender and to gendered identities. The Panel will therefore include those whose engagement with
thinking about gender is spread across the last fifty years.


Gendered Beginnings
Stevi Jackson
(University of York)
In this presentation I will interweave the story of the struggle to gender sociology with the early history
of gender as a concept. The former begins from a time, the late 1960s and early 1970s, when sociology
as a discipline was overwhelmingly male dominated and concerned primarily with the social lives of
men. But this was under challenge. Inspired by the Women’s Liberation Movement, a new generation
of feminist sociologists began to put women back into sociology, to recover the small volume of relevant
research that already existed and to undertake our own. Feminists also organised into the BSA, using
the political skills acquired through activism, with considerable success: the 1974 and 1982
conferences, the formation of the Women’s Caucus and the Equality of the Sexes study group (1974-
5) and sub-committee of the BSA executive (1976), and increasing the representation of women on the
BSA executive. In the beginning we did not have a concept of gender and when it first entered our
vocabulary, via the work of Ann Oakley (1972) and Gayle Rubin (1975), it was not universally accepted.
While the concept of gender was soon established, the relationship between sex and gender, and the
distinction itself, was contested – as were the gendered politics of class and race. In considering both
feminist activism within the BSA and debates around gender within the discipline, I will reflect on the
legacy of the feminist sociologists of the 1970s and early 1980s.


Critical Studies on Men and Masculinities: Implications for the Gendering of Sociology, and the
Sociology of Gender
Jeff Hearn
(University of Huddersfield/ Hanken School of Economics / Örebro University)
In my presentation I address how the development of more critical studies on men and masculinities
relates to the contested concept of gender. The last 50 years have seen a growth of more explicit, more
critical, sometimes more sociological, studies on men and masculinities, however defined. Fifty years
ago, ‘masculinity’ largely meant social psychological identity or sex role; meanwhile, ‘men’ was rarely a
sociological issue, even if sociological classics can be re-read as much or all about men. Feminist
scholarship – and gay/sexualities scholarship – beyond and within sociology, including the BSA,
changed this, at first somewhat indirectly, implicitly, then more explicitly, albeit differently from different
feminisms. These matters are relevant for both the doing of sociology and sociological analysis, and
within the institution of sociology itself. Critical studies on men and masculinities have also concerned
a changing concept of gender away from sex/gender roles, from conflation of sex/gender/sexuality, and
sometimes from sexual/gender divisions and difference(s). They meant naming the unmarked, the
centre(s), the One, of men and masculinities, as social/sociological categories, then available for
Othering and ‘deconstruction’. Women’s Studies, then Gender Studies, problematised staying only
within sociology, and raised questions on naming and positioning of these studies. Locationality,
intersectionality, and reflexive criticality have become more central in the sociology of gender,
conceptualising gender, and gendering sociology, with influences from international projects, queer,
transgender, decoloniality, world geopolitics, and human-nonhuman-planet relations.


Mainstreaming and Multiplying Gender in Sociology
Mary Holmes
(University of Edinburgh)
I will pick up the story of gender in sociology from the 1990s when scholars were responding to shifts
and fragmentations in feminist movement, the rise of poststructuralism, a growth in masculinity studies
and the mainstreaming of gender as an accepted and even essential topic within sociological thinking
and teaching. I will argue that there was a shift from a focus on the material aspects of gender to
understanding it in more symbolic terms. The appearance of Judith Butler’s Gender Trouble in 1990
ushered in a supposedly new paradigm for understanding gender, but arguably one that relied heavily
                                                    58
                        British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                         University of Manchester
                                                                                  Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                        Paper Session 2
                                                                                            11:00-12:30
on established sociological ways of understanding gender. Also, British sociology saw some other ways
of thinking about gender that were still interested in the material conditions in which gender was
produced, such as Bev Skeggs Formations of Class and Gender (1997). There were also increasing
efforts to think about how gender was intertwined with other forms of social inequality not only around
class but around race and ethnicity. This was combined with the beginnings of a more global sociology
of gender.


Sociology of Gender: Tracing Plural Histories, Interrogating Coloniality
Radhika Govinda
(University of Edinburgh)
I see myself reflecting on the panel theme from a unique vantage point, occupying the positions of a
feminist confronting patriarchies in the discipline of sociology, of a feminist and sociologist from the
global south interrogating the agendas of western feminism and sociology, and of a gender-sensitive
sociologist researching intersectional inequalities of caste and gender in India, and more recently of
race, coloniality and gender in UKHE (Rege 2003). I argue that both sociology and gender studies
acknowledge they are situated forms of knowledge production so the history of engendering sociology/
sociology of gender cannot be traced in a singular voice. I trace feminist sociologists’ contributions to
the discipline of sociology in India as a case in point. Early Indian feminist sociologists were instrumental
in interrogating the discipline’s epistemic location within the colonial discourse, shaping its reorientation
in India. Their engagement with women’s issues came from lived experience rather than as a
consequence of and exposure to second wave western feminism, per se. I also reflect on how while
Indian feminist sociologists have found the concept of ‘gender’ useful, Latin American feminist
sociologists have questioned the very concept as a colonial imposition. Whilst their arguments are
grounded in different (postcolonial and decolonial) approaches, both call for an interrogation of
coloniality in sociological knowledge production on gender – I offer an insight into how I have tried to
heed this call in my teaching practice.


Whose Gender Are We Afraid Of?
Finn MacKay
(University of the West of England, Bristol)
As a radical feminist researching gender it has been frustrating to see the term TERF become a
shorthand for trans exclusionary and transphobic politics, while the actual political theory from radical
feminism on gender abolition and queer kinship remains largely unknown. Gender has become a
pathologised property or marker attached to trans men, trans women and gender diverse people only,
enabling the unscrutinised continuation of the dominant gendered status-quo. Ongoing attacks on
limited legal rights and representation for LGBTQ+ people have only elevated levels of scrutiny on
gender expression for the minority whose gender expression is viewed as less than immediately
readable as either male and masculine or female and feminine. In this panel I will discuss the challenges
of researching gender in such an environment and reassert the need for mainstreaming a sociological
understanding of gender as a powerful social structure, which, like all social structures, contains
possibilities for resistance, recreation, personal expression and replacement.



Social Divisions / Social Identities 3 - Room 1.219
Behind the Masks: Exploring the Enablers and Barriers of Good Work for Autistic Women
Stevie Barnes
(University College London)
This research explores experiences of good work for autistic women, drawing on the notion of good
work as a key driver influencing sustainable employment. In the UK, good work is recognised as
contributing to positive health and economic outcomes. However, there is a gap in understanding the
heterogeneity of factors contributing to good, quality work and how this may influence labour market
participation for specific subgroups.
                                                    59
                        British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                         University of Manchester
                                                                                 Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                       Paper Session 2
                                                                                           11:00-12:30
The intersecting identities of being female and autistic mean autistic women face both gender and
ability-based disparities in the workplace. Existing research considers experiences of autism disclosure
and support at work. This research aims to contribute to knowledge of intersectional autistic experiences
at work, considering the barriers contributing to the significantly low employment rate for autistic adults
in the UK and the experience of having multiple marginalised identities in the workplace.
In partnership with the Institute for Employment Studies (IES), a participatory-informed approach
examined the contextual factors influencing experiences of good work for autistic women. These
experiences were explored through twelve semi-structured interviews with autistic women. Inclusive
methods were guided by an advisory group comprising of IES representatives and individuals
contributing lived-experience knowledge or employment expertise. Reflexive thematic analysis
identified interconnecting contextual factors influencing barriers and enablers of good work for autistic
women. The findings identify the limitations of universal definitions of good work, contributing to an
understanding of good work beyond existing frameworks. Most notably, this research identifies the
impact of pathological or neurodiversity knowledge paradigms on influencing experiences of good work.


Who Decides What Counts? Autistic Women, Trauma and the Politics of Recognition
Katrine Callander
(University of Kent)
Autistic women’s accounts of trauma compel sociology to confront both how harm is produced and how
it is recognised. Drawing on participatory life story doctoral research with 62 women and over one million
words of narrative data, this paper traces how trauma emerges not as an isolated event but as
cumulative, relational and systemic. Societal dismissal, gendered norms and medicalised framings
fracture identity and belonging, leaving survivors to navigate cycles of silencing and re-traumatisation.
Yet the meaning of trauma is never neutral. It is mediated by systems of recognition that determine
what “counts” as harm, whose distress is legible and whose voices are disregarded. Autistic women’s
narratives reveal how forms of suffering are routinely reframed as individual deficit or misdiagnosis,
erasing the social roots of injury.
As the language of ‘neurodiversity’ circulates ever more widely, there is a danger that structural violence
shaping autistic women’s lives is obscured and trauma is reduced to an individualised or inevitable
condition rather than recognised as a product of power. This research challenges the assumption that
trauma is inevitable and questions the authority of institutions to decide whose suffering counts and
whose voices are dismissed. As we celebrate the BSA’s 75th anniversary, the presentation will ask
what it means for sociology to inherit traditions that have excluded certain voices and how the discipline
might instead foreground recognition, relationality and agency. By centring autistic women’s narratives,
the research challenges trauma’s inevitability and opens space for neurodivergent-affirming, trauma-
informed futures that reconfigure belonging, legitimacy and social justice.


“They obviously existed but no-one was including them in anything”: Autistic Women’s
Involvement in Feminist Organising
Sara McHaffie
(Northumbria University)
Autistic women’s perspectives are rarely considered within feminist research (Fox 2025). However, an
increase in feminist work by autistic women disrupts stereotypical ideas about our identities and strives
for epistemic justice (e.g. Limburg 2021). My doctoral research project addresses the question How do
autistic women as a subaltern counterpublic express and engage with feminist ideas to counter
epistemic injustice? I draw on Fraser’s concept of subaltern counterpublics (1990) to understand autistic
women’s activism, alongside work from critical autism studies on the need for epistemic justice (Botha
2021) for autistic people.
My research involved two phases: interviewing six autistic feminists, then dialogue with a group of
twelve autistic women in Tayside for eighteen months. Analysis of interviews informed discussion with
the second group, grounding the study in the context of autistic women’s advocacy and feminist thought.
With the second group, we engaged in dialogical groupwork where we discussed our lives and the


                                                   60
                       British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                        University of Manchester
                                                                                 Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                       Paper Session 2
                                                                                           11:00-12:30
relevance of feminist ideas, and used creative writing and embroidery to articulate ideas in more
abstract ways.
One theme which was identified was “They obviously existed but no-one was including them in
anything”: Autistic women’s involvement in feminist organising. Participants described passionate
engagement with feminism, organising alongside other autistic women. However, this is rarely
acknowledged as it is “not that kind-of shouting or loudness”. Additionally, participants described
exclusion from the feminist movement. I present my analysis of ways this theme characterises autistic
feminist resistance, and participants’ involvement in, or (self)exclusion from wider feminist organising.



Sociology of Education 1 - Room 2.220
Creating Performance Sociology (PS): ‘Feeling’ the Social and Political Issue in the Context of
Crime, Education and Neurodivergence
Chrissie Rogers
(University of Kent)
Creating Performance Sociology (PS) bridges my current data and new research. Creativity,
storytelling, performance, and drama within qualitative sociology, anthropology, and criminology are not
new. Neither is script writing and performance that is heavily influenced or driven by social and political
responses to human narratives a new paradigm. Perhaps significant is, more recently creative ways of
telling stories based on real lives or events has escalated, via for example, docudramas, Ethnotheatre,
Verbatim theatre, applied theatre. Human stories ground the re-presentation and are delivered as
authentically as possible. This paper is about connecting the sociological imagination, alongside early
education and political philosophy, human stories, and dramatic creativity. In a landscape of advancing
artificial intelligence where human connection diminishes, I aim to reflect upon facilitating storytelling,
to make and create ways of doing PS, theoretically and practically. By doing so, I hope to make meaning
of education, disability, criminal (in)justice, and care. Notably, the power of images or performance from
page to stage or screen, animates the temporality of life. The writer and the consumer of the script (and
performance) interact, feel, imagine, and make sense of social issues. Critically, however, unlike
perhaps several scripts or creative writing pieces we see in academic work that are driven by the issue,
for PS, similar to Ethnotheatre, the art comes before the message. If the art (script) is created with
meaning and authenticity, readers and audiences will feel and connect to the issue rather than being
‘told’ and therefore be moved to act(ion).


Linguistic Habitus in the Making: How Chinese Primary School Students Internalise Institutional
Language Hierarchies
Lijia Yu
(King's College London)
China’s standard language policies and internal migration have reshaped linguistic environments in
dialect-speaking regions. While existing research focuses on mega-cities with elite migrants and
favourable dialect policies (Liang, 2015), this study examines Ningbo, a tier-two industrial city where
migrants are predominantly working-class and policies align with national Mandarin-promotion
ideologies. Based on six months of ethnographic fieldwork at a public primary school in Ningbo, this
study combines participant observation across formal and informal school contexts with semi-structured
interviews with students across different grade levels. It traces how students internalise and reproduce
institutional language hierarchies through everyday participation drawing on Bourdieu’s concept of
habitus. Three key findings emerge. First, students internalise Mandarin as the default medium for
institutional participation, maintaining systematic adherence even in minimally supervised contexts,
demonstrating internalisation operating through pragmatic recognition rather than explicit enforcement.
Second, students strategically appropriate dialect’s authority-enhancement function observed in
teacher disciplinary practices, deploying targeted Ningbonese expressions for institutional resistance,
peer dominance and collaborative coordination before reverting to Mandarin. Third, dialect serves
solidarity formation among native speakers while marginalising migrant students. Developmental
differences reveal younger students maintain complete Mandarin exclusivity, while older students

                                                   61
                       British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                        University of Manchester
                                                                                   Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                         Paper Session 2
                                                                                             11:00-12:30
demonstrate selective dialect appropriation. The findings demonstrate that linguistic habitus is shaped
through prolonged institutional immersion where language hierarchies are embedded in daily practices,
contributing to understanding of how educational institutions reproduce linguistic inequalities in
multilingual China.


Let the Magic Happen: The Affectivity of Mentoring Relationships in Academia
Maria Keil, Flora Petrik
(Justus Liebig University Giessen)
What is the magic behind successful academic mentoring and the seemingly natural development of
strong bonds in academia? In this paper, we contribute to a critical reflection on academic practices
and evaluation.
Drawing on Pierre Bourdieu’s concept of social magic from relational praxeology, we ask: at which
moments and stages of academic careers do ‘sticky affinities’ create a match between habitus and
field? To address this question, we triangulate data from two qualitative research projects that combine
the perspectives of students and professors in the social sciences in Germany and Austria.
Our analysis shows how a fit with the academic field is created not only through affinity with scientific
practices and study content, but also through the support of gatekeepers for first-generation students.
Yet, gatekeepers hold specific images of what students and doctoral candidates must signal in order to
be recognized as potential mentees or recruits. Consequently, the traits of promising young academics
are shaped not only by class-based understandings of education and field-specific cultural capital, but
also by the perception of these traits as natural gifts. We further highlight mentoring as a reciprocal
process: professors may advance students’ careers through recognition, while students also contribute
to the symbolic capital of their mentors.
With this analysis, we expose how class is woven into meritocratic ideals and illuminate the workings
of social magic in academic settings.


Curricular Reforms, Rythms in Teaching Practice and the Construction of the Low Attaining
Student
Max Aantjes
(University of Cambridge)
After an initial spatial turn in the sociology of education, the past decade has sparked debate on the
interaction between space and time in social practice; this has included a reconsideration of proposals
for conceptual shifts (e.g., from ‘space-time’ to ‘timespace’) and a renewed interest in the affordances
and limitations of how influential theorists, such as Bourdieu and Foucault, conceptualised time. In this
presentation, I will explore two theoretical trajectories which have emerged from these discussions, as
well as their potential for researching social inequality. First, in which ways do the conditions of one field
(in a Bourdieusian sense) affect the temporal structuring of another field? Second, how do such effects
influence the relative positions, and available subject positions (in a Foucauldian sense), of actors in
different fields? I explore these questions with respect to an ongoing research study into the
implementation of a teaching reform initiative (Teaching Mathematics for Mastery) in British secondary
schools that stratify students into different attainment groups. Drawing from extracts of policy
documents, teacher interviews and focus groups, I will show that the temporal structuring of the
curriculum by policy makers is translated into rhythms in teaching practice that vary across high and
low attaining classes, in particular in terms of the ordering of the ‘why’ and the ‘how’, and a divergence
in how different students are seen to desire ‘efficiency’ and ‘connections’. I conclude with a tentative
discussion of how this may affect students’ ‘subjective field of possibles’, both within and outside of
mathematics.




                                                    62
                        British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                         University of Manchester
                                                                                    Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                          Paper Session 2
                                                                                              11:00-12:30

Sociology of Education 2 - Room 3.204
Scholarship as Struggle: Towards a Transnational Understanding of Race and Decolonial
Scholars in Higher Education in Belgium and the UK
Elif Lootens, Lili Schwoerer, Peter Stevens, Bart Van De Putte
(Ghent University)
Over the past decade, decolonization has attracted growing attention across academic fields. The
‘postcolonial turn’ occurred almost a quarter-century ago and sought to bring into focus the ways in
which colonial histories continued to influence culture, labor, and knowledge production. The political-
epistemological movement against ‘coloniality’, that is, the persistence of the structures of power and
privilege that emerged with colonialism in knowledge regimes, remains a subject of much controversy
(Mbembe, 2021). In parallel, far-right parties around the Global North are portraying universities as
breeding grounds for radical thought. Universities and scholars who criticize white privilege, colonialism,
or racial illiteracy are being threatened by right-wing politicians, with anti-colonial and critical race theory
as their main targets (Fúnez-Flores, 2024). Across today’s universities, scholars engaged in
anticolonial, decolonial and anti-settler work navigate intensifying forms of institutional suppression that
disproportionately threaten non-white racialised staff and fields deemed economically “unproductive”
(Holmwood, 2011). Recent suspensions of academics for pro-Palestinian advocacy exemplify the
precarious conditions facing de/postcolonial activist scholars, while other outspoken academics
particularly in less marketized HE systems such as Belgium’s, avoid formal sanction. A common pattern
emerges: marketised higher education narrows the space for activist scholarship, selectively
disciplining voices and re-inscribing epistemic hierarchies under neoliberalism. Drawing on qualitative
interviews with racialised non-white PhD researchers in Flanders (Belgium) and England working on
race and de/postcoloniality, this study develops a transnational analysis of how HE governance regimes
shape who can do this work, which knowledge is valued, and on what terms.


Contesting ‘Value’: Neoliberal Discourses, Rip-Off Degrees, and the Politics of Worth in UK
Higher Education
Ryan Wilkinson
(University of Leeds)
The notion of value in UK higher education has become a site of political contestation, increasingly
framed through discourses of value for money and the vilification of so-called “rip-off degrees.” These
framings, championed in Conservative Party reforms and reinforced through the Office for Students’
regulatory agenda, exemplify the neoliberal and market-oriented restructuring of the sector. Universities
are discursively redefined as providers of economic returns, while students are positioned as investors
required to secure employability outcomes. This paper employs critical discourse analysis of news
media coverage, government policy literature, and political speeches to examine how the language of
value is strategically mobilised to reshape higher education’s purposes and priorities.
Drawing on Pierre Bourdieu’s theorisation of capital, the study interrogates how political and policy
discourses operate to construct value as symbolic capital, privileging economic forms and eroding the
legitimacy of cultural and social capital. The findings suggest that the rhetoric of employability and
financial accountability functions as a tool of symbolic violence, narrowing the definition of worth while
legitimising intervention in higher education governance. The label “rip-off degrees” emerges as a
powerful delegitimising device, targeting disciplines framed as economically unproductive, and
reinforcing stratified hierarchies between universities and subjects. At the same time, counter-
discourses—whether from within academia, student groups, or sections of the media—seek to reassert
education’s civic, intellectual, and cultural purposes. However, these remain persistently marginalised
within neoliberal policy frames, highlighting how struggles over value reveal deeper contests over
authority, legitimacy, and inequality in UK higher education.




                                                    63
                        British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                         University of Manchester
                                                                                   Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                         Paper Session 2
                                                                                             11:00-12:30
Teaching Sociology in Turbulent Times: Resisting Contemporary Reactionary Discourses
Surrounding Higher Education
Charlotte Morris
(University of Portsmouth)
The value and purpose of sociology along with other humanities and social science subjects and the
university itself is under increasing scrutiny. This paper shares findings from the British Academy funded
Teaching in Turbulent Times project which explored contemporary populist discourses surrounding UK
universities, humanities and social science subjects, alongside academic and student perceptions and
responses to these. Recent years have seen anti-intellectualism, entailing a decrying of ‘experts’ and
‘woke’ academics alongside bolstering of hate speech, including in universities (Read, 2018). This is
further situated in a broader context of reactionary politics, rising fascism and anti-migrant discourses
in the UK and beyond. It is therefore imperative that we consider the role of education and our discipline
in resisting such forces (Giroux, 2024).
Social sciences and humanities disciplines such as sociology which involve critical discussions and
often include political and social justice orientated content and approaches are frequently positioned as
controversial (Stanley, 2018). Through critical discourse analysis of popular news outlets alongside
qualitative research with staff and students in humanities and social sciences this project revealed
deeply entrenched imperialist, nationalist and racist discourses in the ways in which ‘ideal’ universities
and academics are constructed as white, there to preserve heteropatriarchal-capitalist-coloniality and
the legacy of empire. Simultaneously some academics are feeling threatened by increased surveillance
and pushback against teaching content by students, set against a backdrop of crisis for the sector. This
paper sheds light on contemporary constructions of universities, academics and students and considers
the implications for our discipline and practice.


After the University? The Rise of the Edu-factory in an Age of Turmoil
Daniel Nehring
(Swansea University)
Around the world, universities find themselves in crisis. From the USA to China and Hong Kong,
academic freedom has come under severe political threat, while budget cuts, mass layofffs, and
extensive structural adjustment programmes batter higher education systems from Argentina to the UK.
Against this backdrop, this paper pursues three lines of inquiry. First, I ask to what extent and in which
ways contemporary higher education institutions can still be characterised as ‘universities’, given their
increasingly comprehensive departure from classic, for example Humboldtian, institutional models. I
highlight the hegemony of discourses, modes of governance, and practices of higher education,
grounded in academic capitalism, that undermine established notions of the university, while drawing
attention to persistent spaces for contestation and re-articulation of what higher education might mean.
Second, to move beyond preliminary notions of the ‘post-university’ salient in recent academic
conversations, I advance the concept of the ‘edu-factory’, as an analytical tool to gain purchase on the
arguably epochal changes and turmoil that are turning universities into ‘something else’ and critically
interrogate the consequences of these epochal changes for academic citizenship and patterns of
inequality and stratification in academic labour. Finally, I consider the implications rise of the edu-factory
for the sociology of education. I call for recursive modes of inquiry that account for the rapidly changing
institutional circumstances that circumscribe what sociologists of education can research. The empirical
analysis underpinning my argument follows a historical comparative approach and draws on case
studies from across different parts of the world.




                                                    64
                        British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                         University of Manchester
                                                                                 Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                       Paper Session 2
                                                                                           11:00-12:30

Theory - Room 4.205
The Evolving Use of Theory in Sociology
Alan Warde
(University of Manchester)
This presentation traces the ways in which the use of theory has been transformed over the 75 years
of existence of the BSA. Different types of theory have seen their fortunes wax and wane. The way that
sociology is practiced in the 21st century – the routines, procedures, norms and aspirations of its
professional exponents – has reduced the prominence of theory and of theory construction as an
objective. The consequence is, paradoxically, that the exceptional expansion and increased
sophistication of empirical sociology is outstripping the discipline’s capability for absorbing and
formulating its findings, which once upon a time have been seen as the mission of theory. I will argue
that the failure to counter abstracted empiricism is in important part due to the conventions of the
contemporary scientific journal. Relevant intellectual trends will be illustrated by an examination and
analysis of the format and content of British sociological journals, their abstracts and keyword lists, and
other assorted sociological compendia. Concluding discussion will focus on how best to deploy theory
alongside empirical studies in order to establish sociological interpretations and explanations of social
arrangements.


Towards Sociology of Moral Obligation
Anna Smolentseva
(University of Cambridge)
The concept of moral obligation is central for understanding and conceptualisation of, and research on,
morality. However, moral obligation has been largely overlooked in sociological discussion. The study
starts from Durkheim’s notion of morality as a system of interrelated concepts: the unity of good and
duty (or moral ideal and moral obligation), social attachment to the group, and individual autonomy
(Author 2024). Sacred moral ideals existing in the symbolic domain of collective representations shape
obligations which belong to the profane domain of daily practices. Obligation/duty is action directed
towards the ideal. Connecting impersonal ideal and individual action, the concept of moral obligation
captures the binding character of the social relationship, linking the individual with others. It is a
particular type of social bond, a building block of collectivities and moralities.
The concept of obligation opens new conceptual and empirical pathways. First, it gives more precision
to the sociological apparatus. The elements of the obligation developed in political philosophy and law,
as well as the Durkheimian hierarchy of obligations, which are presented in this paper, enable the
empirical analysis of a particular morality - for example, in this paper, the transformations of moral
obligations in Russia as it moved from socialism to capitalism. Second, the concept of obligation
facilitates the study of other moral phenomena: indifference as ‘exclusion’ from ‘the universe of
obligation’ (Bauman 2000); amorality as absence of obligation to others; liberal notions of individual
rights based on individualism with no obligations to others (Wolfe 1989); responsibility as obligation.


The Eclipse of Character in Sociology
Sebastian Raza, Galen Watts
(University of Cambridge, University of Waterloo)

Sociological accounts of inequality or stratification are undergirded by notions of fairness. Sociological
accounts of alienation, reflexive agency, or life satisfaction are underpinned by notions of human
flourishing. These two normative modalities are commonplace in contemporary sociology. We argue,
however, that there is a third normative modality—concerned with character. It involves the study of
virtues or vices produced by specific institutional arrangements and social practices, which prove either
corrosive or conducive to the achievement of particular social goods. Our argument is that this modality
has virtually disappeared from sociological discourse.


                                                   65
                       British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                        University of Manchester
                                                                                 Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                       Paper Session 2
                                                                                           11:00-12:30
We begin by showing that questions of character were a key animating concern in the works of classical
sociologists and then show how character became an explicit normative modality animating twentieth-
century sociology. By the start of the twenty-first century, however, sociological interest in character
underwent sudden and near-total eclipse. Our argument is that behind its disappearance in sociology
lies a transformation in the way institutions are conceptualized in the discipline. No longer seen as
environments of moral socialization where different virtues are or are not cultivated, institutions came
to be understood almost exclusively as arenas of conflict over resources, as sites of subjectivation and
discursive disciplining, or as systems of stratification. Finally, we contend that a revival of sociological
concern with character is necessary and could be accomplished by means of a renewal of the study of
social types and a revision of the concept of socialization.



Work, Employment & Economic Life 1 -
Room 3.212
Flexibility at a Cost: Gendered Career Consequences of Using Flexible Work Arrangements in
the UK
Sizhan Cui
(University of Oxford)
Flexible work arrangements (FWAs) are widely promoted as tools to support employees’ work–life
balance, yet their use may inadvertently signal reduced commitment or availability to supervisors,
resulting in negative career outcomes. Existing studies often compare FWA users to non-users without
accounting for whether employees had the opportunity to use them, thereby conflating access with use.
Using the UK Household Longitudinal Study (UKHLS) waves 2-14 and fixed-effect models, this study
isolates the career consequences of using FWAs when access exists, with particular attention to
gendered dynamics and family context. Results indicate that among employees with access to FWAs,
those who use them face a significantly higher risk of demotion compared to non-users, with this penalty
more pronounced for women than men. For women, the effect is conditional on family stage: FWA use
is not associated with demotion risk when they have preschool-aged children, but is linked to negative
career outcomes when they have no children or older children. By contrast, men’s use of FWAs is not
significantly related to demotion risk, regardless of family circumstances. These findings reveal that the
costs of FWAs emerge not from access itself but from use, reflecting the persistence of a flexibility
stigma shaped by gendered expectations of work and caregiving. We argue that expanding access
alone is insufficient; organizations must address the normative assumptions underpinning flexibility
stigma to ensure FWAs promote both work–life balance and equitable career progression.


Heteronormative Discrimination and Violence against Trans Women in the Labour Market in
Lima (Peru)
Maria Del Pilar Grados Bueno
(University of Sussex)

In many countries, LGBTIQ+ populations face significant difficulties in the labour market as they can
experience discrimination and gender-based violence in their workplaces (McFadden, 2015). Among
this group, trans women confront the most significant challenges in accessing and participating in the
labour market due to discrimination based on their gender expression (Beauregard et al., 2018; Coll-
Planas and Missé, 2018; McFadden, 2015). This pattern of discrimination is present in the Peruvian
labour market, where this population is constrained to precarious economic activities. In Lima, Peru's
capital, 64% of trans women work as sex workers and 28% as hairdressers, while a minority perform
jobs in other sectors (Salazar et al., 2010).
Despite this situation, the literature on gendered labour markets provides minimal insight into how
gender norms affect individuals outside the gender binary. This paper aims to contribute to this gap by
analysing how heteronormative discrimination and violence influence trans women's labour trajectories
in Lima (Peru). This research finds that heteronormativity produces and reinforces stereotypes about
trans women, linked to narratives of sexualization, pathology, deviance, and beauty care. These
                                                     66
                         British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                          University of Manchester
                                                                                Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                      Paper Session 2
                                                                                          11:00-12:30
stereotypes manifest in experiences of discrimination, microaggressions, and violence encountered by
the participants.
This paper draws from primary qualitative data collected through fieldwork conducted in Lima from
September 2023 to April 2024. During this period, I carried out 40 in-depth interviews and two
photovoice workshops with trans women about their experiences working in stereotypical jobs (e.g.,
sex work and hairdressing) as well as in professional, sales, and service occupations.


How “Mom Jobs” Impact Gender Equality in Precarious Labour Market: The Case of Temporary
Teachers within Public Education Sector of China
Ying Huang
(University of Warwick)
In response to increasing public demands for workplace gender equality amid women’s care burdens,
China announced the promotion of “mom jobs” in 2022. These low-paid roles are designed to enable
women to juggle paid employment and unpaid childcare. Glucksmann’s (2002) concept of the Total
Social Organisation of Labour (TSOL) highlights the alignment of time and space in integrating paid and
unpaid work through organisational pratices. In China’s public education sector, decades of
restructuring have produced large numbers of temporary teachers—predominantly women—who face
injustice in pay, workload, and social protection. Many remain in such job because of the alignment
between their workplace and their children’s school, yet little research has examined this phenomenon
from the perspective of gendered precarious labour.
Drawing on 27 semi-structured in-depth interviews with female temporary teachers in Wuhan, China,
the findings indicate that such “mom jobs” do not advance gender equity. Instead, they deepen
exploitation across both paid and unpaid labour. First, time and space alignment intensifies time
poverty, as teachers are expected to follow their children’s educational schedules. Second, this time
poverty undermines long-term career prospects, restricting access to stable employment with adequate
income and social protection, and thereby limiting economic independence. Finally, this alignment
fosters isolation from colleagues and bonds with employers, curtailing opportunities for collective action
and resistance.
These findings extend the TSOL framework by demonstrating how “mom jobs” exacerbate rather than
alleviate gender inequality, revealing their negative implications for working mothers in an increasingly
precarious labour market.


Men and Menstruation in the Wilderness: Unveiling the Unspoken in Nontraditional Workplaces
Ashmika Motee
(Heriot-Watt University)
This study explores how the interplay between organisational structures and menstruation
management, including treatment pathways, influences employment experiences of those working in
remote and challenging environments. Through the lens of Gendered Organisation Theory (Acker,
1990), this research examines how gendered norms shape professional identities, job satisfaction, and
career progression among employees navigating menstruation in such settings.
Data were collected through semi-structured interviews with 34 women and 18 men across sectors
where gender equity policies often overlook menstruation-specific needs such as research vessels,
deep-sea mining, mountain/hills, deserts, rain forest, high-conflict zones, and polar expeditions. Data
were analysed using a thematic approach providing an in-depth understanding of menstruation
management in these environments as well as the experiences of men leading or working alongside
menstruating colleagues.
Findings reveal that managing basic toileting facilities is arduous, let alone managing menstruation.
Gendered norms exacerbate these challenges, posing distinct professional difficulties. Furthermore,
men’s perspectives highlight gaps in current workplace inclusivity practices and a lack of awareness
about the challenges faced by their menstruating coworkers.


                                                   67
                       British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                        University of Manchester
                                                                                    Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                          Paper Session 2
                                                                                              11:00-12:30
This research addresses understudied issues of menstruation, contributing to the discourse on gender
equality and inclusion in nontraditional workplaces while providing valuable insights for policy
recommendations to better support menstruating employees.
Key recommendations include:
    1. Normalising conversations on menstruation
    2. Incorporating menstruation management in pre-training and risk assessment–
    3. Providing resources and infrastructure.
These recommendations promote equal opportunities and supportive environment while advancing
inclusive practices for employees with varying needs working in remote and demanding work settings.



Work, Employment & Economic Life 2 -
Room 3.213
Post-digital Reaction: Carbon Capitalist Imaginaries of ‘Real’ Work and Masculinity in a
Manufacturing SME
Christopher Land, Jana Stefan
(Anglia Ruskin University)
Drawing on ethnographic research conducted during a three-year project examining Industry 5.0 in
European manufacturing, this paper analyses how gender and political identities conflict with attempts
to realise a ‘twin transition’ of digitalisation and sustainability in manufacturing. Our research case is
situated in the industrial heartland of former West Germany. The company produces high-quality
industrial gas applications, occupying a specialist market niche with few competitors. Despite this, an
aging workforce and political ambitions to decarbonise European manufacturing threaten its long-term
viability. Whilst a ‘twin transition’ would offer some solutions, it was actively resisted at all levels of the
organization.
We examine this resistance through the interplay of deindustrialisation and masculinity. Workers’
identities in the company were invested in industrial values of hard, physical labour inherited from coal
and steel. The paper argues that resistance to digitalisation and sustainability was connected to a kind
of ‘post-industrial melancholia’, in which identities had been actively invested in this sense of loss,
valorising previous generations as ‘real men’, and interpreting digitalisation and electrification as a kind
of emasculation. The paper contributes to the literature on masculinity and deindustrialisation
(Strangleman, 2024), exploring the relationship between nostalgia, reactionary politics, and contested
ideologies of the future of work (Dries et al., 2025).
References

       Dries N, Luyckx J, Stephan U, et al. (2025) The Future of Work: A Research Agenda. Journal
        of Management.
       Strangleman T (2024) The World We Have Lost: Reflections on Varieties of Masculinity at
        Work. International Labor and Working-Class History 105: 9–25.


Algorithmic Reproduction of Gendered Hiring Biases: A Résumé Audit of LLMs in the Chinese
Context
Linfeng Shen, Qiang Tan
(Chinese University of Hong Kong)
Against the backdrop of increasing corporate adoption of AI for résumé screening, this study
investigates whether large language models (LLMs) replicate and amplify gendered biases in hiring,
specifically the documented human tendency to penalize high-achieving women. Through a large-scale
computational audit study utilizing over 300,000 Chinese job postings from Liepin, we test whether
LLMs exhibit the bias identified by Quadlin (2018), where women benefit from competence but are

                                                    68
                        British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                         University of Manchester
                                                                                  Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                        Paper Session 2
                                                                                            11:00-12:30
penalized for exceptional academic achievement. For each job ad, we employed a factorial survey
design, presenting LLMs with eight different candidate profiles varying systematically by gender,
institutional prestige (985 vs. 211 universities in China), and GPA (3.9 vs. 3.3). Two primary tasks were
used: candidate selection and full ranking. The main experiment was conducted using DeepSeek-V3,
with robustness checks performed using Qwen3-32B. Our results confirm that LLMs reproduce the
human bias: high-GPA women were consistently ranked lower and selected less often than their male
counterparts with identical credentials. This penalty was most pronounced in male-stereotyped
occupational domains. Two supplementary experiments revealed that time pressure significantly
amplified this bias, likely by forcing heuristic processing, and that gendered organizational culture
descriptions in job ads primed the models to shift their evaluation criteria, either exacerbating or
mitigating the bias. These findings demonstrate that algorithmic bias in hiring is not static but highly
context-dependent, shaped by cognitive constraints and situational cues. This research underscores
the urgent need for regulatory frameworks that address the situational nature of algorithmic
discrimination rather than treating it as a fixed property.


A Class System of Horticultural Work? Working for ‘5 a Day’ in the English Countryside
Lydia Medland
(University of Bristol)
Two profiles of horticultural worker are prominent: farmers and (usually migrant) workers. Drawing on
fieldwork from five English counties and forty interviews, the paper unsettles these profiles by illustrating
further groupings of people who work in edible horticulture. These profiles are: seasonal migrant
workers; migrant workers with long-term rights in the UK; citizen workers and self-employed people;
employees, and land-owning farmers. By proposing five types of horticultural worker, identified within a
class system, the paper visibilises more people and power relations within the sector than is habitual.
Despite occupying different social positions, horticultural workers experience common pressures
associated with the global political economy of food. Fresh produce production (or farming) is
challenging in advanced capitalist economies because profits are small and competition from lower-
income economies is high. Working to produce fruits and vegetables, the risks and pressures are
highest for workers closest to the crops. Amongst non-citizen workers: seasonal migrant workers are
threatened with deportation if unproductive while other migrant workers face onerous and changeable
border controls. For citizens, precarious horticultural workers struggle with insecure living conditions
(sometimes on-site). Employees of farm businesses often enjoy secure employment but are
constrained to working beneath owners who often inherit land. Finally, land-owning farmers experience
pressure as profits are challenged by factors including low-cost imports and the retraction of farm
subsidies. Taken together, each role within the English horticultural class system is under pressure
within a socio-economic system that undervalues food-related work. The paper invites discussion on
social class and food work.




                                                      69
                          British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                           University of Manchester
                                      PLENARY
                                      14:00-15:00
                                  Lecture Theatre B

                       WANTED DEAD OR ALIVE: THE PLAYBOOK
                              Jason Arday, University of Cambridge
     Chaired by Angharad Beckett, University of Leeds, BSA Publications Trustee


                                Jason Arday is Professor of Sociology of Education at the University
                                of Cambridge, Faculty of Education, and a Fellow at Jesus College,
                                Cambridge. He was formerly a Guest Editor on BBC Radio 4’s Today
                                Programme.
                                Professor Arday has previously held the position of Professor of
                                Sociology of Education at the University of Glasgow, School of
                                Education; Associate Professor in Sociology at Durham University in
                                the Department of Sociology; and Deputy Executive Dean for People
                                and Culture in the Faculty of Social Science and Health.
                                Jason is a Patron of the Adult Literacy Trust (ALT) and Get Further. He
                                was formerly a Trustee of the Runnymede Trust, the UK’s leading Race
                                Equality Thinktank for 11 years. Presently, he is a Trustee of the British
                                Sociological Association (BSA) and Autism Action.
Jason sits on the NHS Race and Health Observatory Academic Reference Group and the ITV Cultural
Advisory Council.


Join us after the break to continue the discussion:

Paper Session 3, 15:30-17:00
Room 3.213 - Special Event
‘You’re being watched!’: Sociologists at Risk of Harm
Pauline Leonard and Aston Kingdon




                                                   70
                       British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                        University of Manchester
                                    PAPER SESSION 3
                                       15:30-17:00




                                             Session Table of Contents
Cities, Mobilities, Place & Space - Room 3.211 ................................................................................ 72
Culture, Media, Sport & Food - Room 3.210 ..................................................................................... 73
Emerging Themes & Special Events - Room 3.213 (Special Event) ................................................ 75
Environment & Society - Room 4.214 ............................................................................................... 76

Families & Relationships 1 - Room 4.204 ......................................................................................... 77
Families & Relationships 2 - Room 4.209 ......................................................................................... 78
Families & Relationships 3 - Room 4.211 ......................................................................................... 80

Lifecourse - Room 4.213 ................................................................................................................... 82
Medicine, Health & Illness - Room 3.209 .......................................................................................... 83
Methodological Innovations - Room 4.206 ........................................................................................ 85
Race, Ethnicity & Migration 1 - Room 2.217 ..................................................................................... 87

Race, Ethnicity & Migration 2 - Room 2.218 ..................................................................................... 89
Race, Ethnicity & Migration 3 - Room 2.219 ..................................................................................... 90
Science, Technology & Digital Studies - Room 3.205....................................................................... 92
Social Divisions / Social Identities 1 - Lecture Theatre A .................................................................. 93
Social Divisions / Social Identities 2 - Room 1.218 ........................................................................... 94
Social Divisions / Social Identities 3 - Room 1.219 ........................................................................... 96
Sociology of Education 1 - Room 2.220 ............................................................................................ 98
Sociology of Education 2 - Room 3.204 ............................................................................................ 99
Theory - Room 4.205....................................................................................................................... 100

Work, Employment & Economic Life - Room 3.212 ........................................................................ 102




                                                        71
                            British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                             University of Manchester
                                                                               Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                     Paper Session 3
                                                                                         15:30-17:00

Cities, Mobilities, Place & Space - Room 3.211
Whose City? Power and Democracy in Planning Britain's Next Generation of 'New Towns': A
Case Study of Plymouth City Centre
Mike Sheaff
(University of Plymouth)
In September 2025, announcing plans for twelve ‘New Towns’, the government promised “the next
generation of new towns must match [the previous] post-war vision” One proposed location, Plymouth
city centre, was identified in 2023 as one of twenty sites for Michael Gove’s policy of “gentle
densification”. This led to proposals for 5,000 new homes within the city centre, subsequently expanded
to 10,000. In February 2025, minutes of a Strategic Board (disclosed in response to an Environmental
Information Regulations request), reported discussion on a “capacity study” indicating “30 high
residential towers in the city centre”.
Contextualising this within developments since the work of Pahl, Harvey and others on the shift from
urban managerialism to urban entrepreneurialism, this paper starts with Pahl’s question, ‘Whose City?’
to consider issues of governance, power and control.
For example, noting that “careful thought will have to be given to achieving the vision of having a
coherent new town identify in the city centre”, the New Towns Commission’s Final Report acknowledges
that some of Plymouth’s first housing sites will achieve lower levels of ‘affordable housing’ than the
government's “gold standard” of 40% due to an objective to “deliver good quality housing.”
An early study of Britain’s first new town, Stevenage, concluded, “the most fundamental problem posed
by the Stevenage experience [is] . . . the extent to which efficient executive action is compatible with
the democratic process” (Orlans, 1952). Here I consider how this tension may be further mediated and
intensified through the role of commercial interests.


Housing with Pride? Coproducing Initiatives to Challenge Inequality Experienced by LGBTQ+
People in the Housing Sector in the UK
Andrew King
(University of Surrey)
This paper draws on a series of projects undertaken by the presenter and colleagues that address the
concerns and experiences of LGBTQ+ people in relation to housing, both in terms of social housing
and housing in later life. After presenting evidence from our research on these housing inequalities, the
presentation outlines a series of co-production projects where LGBTQ+ community members, support
organisations and housing sector policy makers and housing providers, have worked together with
academic researchers to create change – both in terms of an equality framework that is now a national
scheme and knowledge exchange opportunities in terms of housing staff training and community
engagement. The paper reflects critically on this work; it considers what challenges and compromises
have been required, but also the ways that collaborative, coproduced initiatives can bring about greater
equality and action within institutions and specific places.


Fragmented Communities of the Vertical City: Rethinking Sense of Place and Social Capital
Zehra Ruya Yuksel
(MEF University)
This paper conceptualises vertical urbanisation as a socio-spatial formation and restructuring of urban
habitus by situating the ascent of high-rises amid struggles over sense of place, dimensions of
belonging, and the reconfiguration of social capital. The current speed of verticality disrupts
conventional understanding and sense of neighbourhood, proximity, and community, while
simultaneously generating new, stratified spaces of interaction, exclusion, and identity-making. As a
distinctive urban form, high-rise living calls for a fresh sociological scrutiny on how our collective


                                                     72
                         British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                          University of Manchester
                                                                                  Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                        Paper Session 3
                                                                                            15:30-17:00
attachment to places are (re)formed, contested, and transformed within vertically structured
environments.
Earlier vertical housing projects sought to provide affordable shelter and foster social life. In contrast,
much of today’s urban skyline increasingly functions as speculative investment assets for elites,
spatially separating the wealthy above from the rest below. This shift signifies not only an economic
restructuring of urban land but also a profound reconfiguration of social fabric. Drawing on historical
trajectories from Le Corbusier’s “Plan Voisin” to Rem Koolhaas’s visions of the “city in the sky", this
paper examines the transformation of vertical urbanism from post-war social housing to neoliberal mega
projects marketed as investment assets.
Integrating perspectives from urban and cultural sociology, and debates in place branding studies, the
paper conceptualises how vertical urbanisation reconfigures residents’ sense of belonging, mediates
opportunities for social interaction, and conditions community engagement. It stresses the paradox of
verticality as both a symbol of urban aspirations and a catalyst for social fragmentation and asks-
curicially- for whom such vertical futures are imagined.



Culture, Media, Sport & Food - Room 3.210
The Re-habitualisation of Boycotts: From Disruption to Everyday Life
Wang-Shu Liu
(University of Manchester)
Boycotts, as a form of political consumption, are commonly framed as momentary acts of political
resistance - either as moral expressions within the field of consumption, or tactic disruptions in social
movements. Although widely researched, existing work tends to focus on the impact or mobilisation of
boycotts, often overlooking the process of how it may emerge, evolve, or dissolve into everyday life. To
conceptualise this dynamic, I draw on practice theory, which offers a processual lens grounded in the
idea that social life is constituted through evolving, routinised practices, making it well-suited to
exploring post-disruption trajectories.
This project adopts a comparative case study approach, focusing on three boycott campaigns in the
UK context: Nestlé, Amazon, and the pro-Palestine boycott. The research explores how boycott
practices be embedded into everyday life. These cases highlight different dimensions of power and
consumer struggle: from challenging a specific state regime to multinational companies, and from taste
disruption to lifestyle changes tied to digital infrastructures. Moreover, both Nestlé and Amazon also
appear on the pro-Palestine boycott list, raising further space to explore how consumers navigate their
own positionalities within today’s turbulent and morally complex world.
The paper will draw on these cases to explore how boycott practices intersect with everyday
consumption routines. Rather than linear habituation, it emphasises a spiral progression in the ongoing
redefinition of ‘ethics’. In this way, it offers a new orientation for understanding the afterlife of boycott
practices, fostering dialogue between the field of social movement, consumption and everyday life.


Romance, Resistance, and Regulation: The Pink Tax in Chinese Business Otome Games
Boyang Liang
(University of Leeds)
The pink tax refers to women paying higher prices for substitutable goods or services, constituting a
form of structural discrimination. While existing studies have focused on physical consumption, digital
games remain an overlooked domain. With the rise of in-app purchases, Japanese console otome
games have shifted into China’s mobile market, raising key questions for this study: Does the pink tax
exist in the virtual consumption sphere of otome games, and how is it constructed, reproduced, and
legitimized through game mechanics, emotional narratives, and player practices?
This paper takes Love and Deepspace as its core case study, with the male-oriented mobile game
Wuthering Waves as a point of comparison. By examining differences in pricing systems, gacha

                                                    73
                        British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                         University of Manchester
                                                                                   Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                         Paper Session 3
                                                                                             15:30-17:00
mechanisms, and item validity between the two games, and drawing on behavioral economics
discussions of sunk cost and scarcity effects, the study reveals the structural inequalities underlying
gendered consumption logics. Furthermore, using digital ethnography, it analyses highly interactive
discussions on social media platforms such as Xiaohongshu, focusing on how female players engage
in resistance and reinterpretation through practices. The study also considers the extension of virtual
consumption logic into real markets, through official merchandise strategies as well as third-party live-
streamed gambling-like gacha and blind box sales.
This paper demonstrates how gendered consumption and emotional costs operate in digital
entertainment, while also highlighting the vulnerability of female players in the absence of effective
regulation. In doing so, it addresses broader issues of governance in China’s digital economy and the
struggle for women’s discursive space.


‘Being an influencer isn't just taking a quick photo’: The Fantasmic Logics Underpinning Older
Female Influencers’ Digital Labour
Vicki Harman
(University of Reading)
This paper investigates the experiences and motivations of older female influencers aged 50+, 60+ or
70+. Social media influencing is a type of labour without clear and standardized structures of payment
and benefits (Trittin-Ulbrich and Glozer, 2024). Younger influencers have been characterised as
engaged in aspirational labour (Duffy 2017) seeking to build careers from their free or underpaid work
on social media, which raises questions about why older influencers might also devote time and effort
to work with uncertain and potentially poor renumeration in light of the time invested. Drawing on
qualitative interviews with 19 older female influencers active on Instagram, we employ framework
analysis to map older influencers’ experiences and the fantasmic logics (Glynos and Howarth, 2007;
Tirapani and Willmott, 2023) underpinning their digital labour. The findings provide insight into the
significant hope and aspirations that older influencers have linked to their digital creator activities. These
include imaginings of re-writing dominant scripts focused on ageing, invisibility and decline, new
encounters with like-minded women, community, pride and accomplishment, appetite for new and
unexpected adventures, and aspirations for success in future. The contributions of the paper are to
extend existing studies of digital labour, fantasmic logics, hope, and to put forward new understandings
of contemporary ageing through the work of being an older influencer.


The Fear of Being Called Out: Towards a Sociology of Hypocrisy
Mark Doidge, James Jackson, Oscar Berglund, Jenny Amann, Samuel Toscano
(Loughborough University)
The concept of hypocrisy should be central to the study of sociology; social life is inherently complex.
The roots of hypocrisy are about the difference between words and deeds. Our everyday lives are
complex webs of millions of interactions and relationships which are at the heart of the sociological
imagination and it should not be controversial to say that how we act may differ from how we talk about
things. There are a myriad number of political, legal, social, economic and cultural impacts on human
beings that affect how they act and interact in the world. Yet the literature on hypocrisy has
overwhelmingly focused on the (alleged) hypocrite acts of individuals or their motivations for the deceit.
This is particularly the case in the area of climate change. This paper will focus on the space between
the words and the deeds and how we account for this absence. Based on interviews with people
involved in sustainability in football, it shows how the fear of being called a hypocrite prevents climate
action. Yet there are structural aspects – or structural hypocrisy – that impacts on individuals' ability to
act in line with their words. This leads to a reflexive hypocrisy where individuals acknowledge and 'own'
this hypocrisy in order to be authentic in their presentation of self and engage in climate action.




                                                    74
                        British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                         University of Manchester
                                                                                 Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                       Paper Session 3
                                                                                           15:30-17:00

Emerging Themes & Special Events -
Room 3.213
Special Event
‘You’re being watched!’: Sociologists at Risk of Harm
Pauline Leonard, Ashton Kingdon
(University of Southampton)
In recent years, sociologists and criminologists have been increasingly experiencing hostile, abusive
and aggressive reactions to their research. Posts on social media about new research findings and
publications can attract streams of hatred-filled attacks. This is particularly experienced by women,
often intersecting with ethnicity, religion and sexuality. It can be in response to any topic of research,
but reactions turn especially virulent on any issues relating to far-right activism and inequalities in race
and ethnicity, gender and sexuality. Posters are often explicitly racist and sexist, threatening physical
harm and even rape and murder. Trollers may act as individuals or as members of a network,
sometimes encouraging others to join the hostility through doxxing: publishing private contact details
and personal information to expose researchers to further harassment and fear.
Online abuse can also potentially spill over into actual physical, face to face contact. Some researchers
have experienced unwanted visits to their offices, and hecklers turning up at speaking events to create
a climate of hostility and fear. Such experiences are truly frightening, and few of us have the knowledge
and skills to cope with these as individuals.
And nor should we. This is clearly an important issue for both institutions and professional associations,
who have a duty of care to ensure the health and wellbeing of their communities. Current institutional
frameworks primarily focus on protecting research subjects rather than researchers themselves. When
institutions lack awareness of online research risks, they effectively shift responsibility for researcher
safety from employer to individual - creating serious workplace health and safety concerns. The lack of
institutional awareness regarding ethical considerations in online research translates directly to
insufficient support for researchers. Many institutions lack appropriate guidelines for conducting safe
research online, including protocols for protecting personal data, maintaining mental and emotional
well-being when studying violent materials, and explicit steps researchers should take when subjected
to networked harassment campaigns. Where such guidance exists, it is often produced by external
entities rather than being clearly integrated into institutional policies and compliance requirements.
In response to such threats, researchers may feel forced to be silent about their research on public
platforms, not only diminishing the potential of their research findings to positively impact social
challenges, but also negatively affecting their research careers. Social media is increasingly important
for developing networks and reaching stakeholders and funders (Head et al 2023) and non-participation
may entrench inequalities between researchers. This creates a particular equity concern, as networked
harassment disproportionately targets women and minority researchers, meaning that generalised
advice to withdraw from online engagement may negatively impact the advancement and retention of
marginalised researchers at higher rates.
The aim of this session is to provide an open forum to discuss this issue. If you have experienced trolling
and abuse because of your research, please do come along to share your experiences and thoughts
on how the BSA can develop effective support structures. A sector-wide, connected network could
provide an important resource for us all, enabling us to share experiences and support each other.




                                                   75
                       British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                        University of Manchester
                                                                                   Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                         Paper Session 3
                                                                                             15:30-17:00

Environment & Society - Room 4.214
Resilience Based Model in Anthropocene Context: Spirituality, Social Support and Gender
Norms as Predictors of Coping Strategies amid Climate Change among Hiltorrent Flood
Survivors in Pakistan
Mussarat Hussain, Tauqeer Ahmed
(University of Sargodha Pakistan)
Climate change has intensified the frequency and severity of extreme weather events across the globe
but specifically in South Punjab, Pakistan due to destructive hill-torrent floods. These events cause
widespread displacement, livelihood loss, and psychological distress among the vulnerable victims that
underscore the resilience strategies. Through resilience framework, this study examined the predictive
roles of spirituality, perceived social support, and gender norms in shaping coping strategies among
flood survivors. A cross-sectional survey was conducted by using standardized interview schedule
instrument from 315 participants in Rajanpur and Dera Ghazi Khan two of the most flood-prone districts
in the region. Data was analyzed through structural equation modeling. Findings revealed that social
support and gender norms exerted strong, statistically significant effects on coping, while spirituality
contributed a modest yet significant resilient variable. The results highlight that kinship networks,
communal ties, and culturally embedded gendered roles substantially provide support. By contributing
to an under-researched field of disaster research in Pakistan, this research contributes to a more
comprehensive understanding of post-disaster psychosocial adjustment, and provides evidence to
guide inclusive, gender-sensitive and culturally-sensitive disaster management policies in climate-
vulnerable areas.


Living in Extreme Weather: Water Insecurity, Embodied Labour, and Everyday Coping
Tripti Singh, Vangelis Pitidis
(University of Warwick)
Climate extremes such as flooding and heatwaves recur seasonally and shape daily life in informal
settlements, and are expected to become increasingly frequent and severe. Research on water
insecurity often emphasises technical aspects such as unreliable pipelines, intermittent supply and poor
quality, while less attention is given to social and gendered dimensions or disaster contexts. This study
examines how climate change affects residents of two informal settlements in Jaipur, with a focus on
water as both a material necessity and a marker of social inequality. While one settlement is low-lying,
relies on communal water points, and lacks drainage infrastructure, with houses in the lowest areas
flooded during the monsoon, the other depends on pipelines but faces ecological risks, bordered by
rocky hills and dunes that limit access and heighten vulnerability. Residents cope through labour-
intensive strategies, including collecting, storing, rationing, and sharing water, often at considerable
bodily and social cost. Women and children bear disproportionate responsibility, affecting health,
education, and livelihoods. Seasonal crises are normalised, with residents adapting coping
mechanisms despite risks.
Drawing on phenomenology and embodiment theory, the study demonstrates how infrastructural
failures are inscribed on residents’ bodies. The concept of ‘bodies as infrastructure’ underscores how
physical labour and social networks compensate for inadequate services, while slow infrastructure
violence embeds inequality in daily routines. Long waits, flooded alleys, and enduring fatigue reveal the
temporal, spatial, and embodied impacts of water insecurity. By centring lived experience, the study
provides evidence to inform climate-sensitive urban policy that addresses everyday inequalities.


“It’s lucky that we live in Iceland”: Nordic Exceptionalism and Narratives of Climate
In/Vulnerability in Contemporary Iceland
Utsa Mukherjee, Auður Magndís Auðardóttir
(Brunel University of London)
While climate vulnerability, that is the distribution of climate risks, is widely discussed, relatively little
scholarly attention has been paid to how fantasies of climate invulnerability underpin climate inaction
                                                    76
                        British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                         University of Manchester
                                                                                   Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                         Paper Session 3
                                                                                             15:30-17:00
and justify the maintenance of status quo, thus reproducing existing patterns of exploitation and violence
(Weatherill, 2025). This paper contributes to the emergent body of critical scholarship on the politics of
climate in/vulnerability through a focus on contemporary Iceland. Drawing on in-depth interviews with
27 participants who are actively engaged in promoting environmental sustainability in their daily lives,
we show how Iceland’s geographical location in the North Atlantic is invoked by participants to advance
ideas of relative climate in/vulnerability of the island. Analysed through prisms of critical feminist and
decolonial politics, these narratives assume two main forms. One portrays Iceland as geographically
‘lucky’, thereby less vulnerable to climate risks which are displaced onto far-off places ‘at risk’. The other
sees Iceland as not doing enough to combat climate change, thereby exposing itself to future risks from
‘elsewhere’. We argue that these narratives of climate invulnerability are produced at the intersection
of colonial imaginaries of geographical risks and widespread acceptance of Icelandic exceptionalism
that obviates critical examination of current status quo. Perceptions of climate invulnerability,
understood to be outcomes of geographical location and ‘luck’, deflect attention away from the material
processes of colonialism, racial capitalism and geographical inequalities that lead to uneven distribution
of resources and risks.


Droughts in the Past Millennium Reduce Violent Crime Incidence: The Power of Parching and
Prayer
Zhihui Fu, Qing Tian, Zhuo Chen, Jiazhi Chen, Beibei Liu, Yan Wang, Yunsong Chen
(Nanjing University)
Natural disasters are not just environmental phenomena but also exert profound effects on collective
behavior by shaping social norms. Yet existing research has largely emphasized short-term impacts,
overlooking the long-term influence of historical disasters on contemporary behavior through cultural
pathways. Using historical disaster data (1000-1900) from China, this study finds that frequent historical
droughts significantly reduce present-day violent crime, while successful rain-praying rituals in response
to droughts moderated this effect. We link these findings to the historical Chinese cultural belief
“Interactions between Heaven and Mankind (Tian Ren Gan Ying)”: without effective disaster mitigation,
ancient societies often interpreted droughts as divine warnings, leading to self-imposed behavioral
constraints; successful rituals signaled forgiveness, weakening constraints. Over time, such cultural
and institutional responses became embedded in collective memory, continuing to shape behavior in
modern times. In contrast, floods rarely triggered such moral responses. These findings highlight how
historical environmental adversity, interpreted through culturally embedded frameworks, leaves
persistent imprints on modern patterns of violence, offering new insights into the interplay among
environmental stress, cultural evolution, and reduction of violent crime.



Families & Relationships 1 - Room 4.204
Pregnancy in Precarious Time: Transitions to Parenthood under Non-standard Work Schedules
Anne Lambert
(Institut National d'Etudes Démographiques)

Non-standard work schedules (i.e. outside of the typical 9 am to 5 pm, Monday to Friday) are
increasingly prevalent in UE countries. A growing body of research highlights their negative impacts on
workers and families (Presser, 2003), including reduced parental well-being (Zinalawala & MaCunn,
2024; Han, 2025), increased levels of work-family conflict (Lambert et al., 2023; Taiji & Mills, 2020;
Tammelin et al., 2017), and adverse mental health outcomes, particularly for women (Torquati, 2019).
However, little is known about how NSWS affect the transition to parenthood, especially in the pre-birth
period, due to lack of appropriate data.
This paper addresses this gap by focusing on how NSWS shape the experience of becoming a parent.
Drawing on 80 in-depth interviews with women employed under non-standard schedules in France, it
explores how they make sense of non-standard work schedules and experience the process of
childbirth, and early parenthood under conditions of temporal precarity. Grounded in theories of social
time, gender, and work-family conflict, the article identifies the symbolic, relational, and material forms
of labour women engage in to make childbirth both desirable, and feasible.

                                                    77
                        British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                         University of Manchester
                                                                                    Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                          Paper Session 3
                                                                                              15:30-17:00
Findings reveal the hidden costs of non-standard schedules, including elevated rates of pregnancy
complications and miscarriages, and offer a critical perspective on the consequences of labour temporal
deregulation.


Black like Me: Making Black Babies with Assisted Reproductive Technologies
Patricia Hamilton
(University of York)
Anthropology and sociology scholars have argued that assisted reproductive technologies reinforce the
myth that race has a biological essence (Moll, 2019; Russell, 2018). This is especially true when fertility
treatment requires the contribution of a third-party including surrogates, egg and sperm donors and
donated embryos. Research has revealed that the sector treats racial matching as ideal, seeking to
replicate unassisted reproduction. However, much of the existing racial matching scholarship focuses
on the reproduction of white babies (Nordqvist, 2012; Pande, 2021) and to a lesser extent, ‘mixed’
babies (Keaney, 2023; Newman, 2019). Drawing from pilot research examining black people’s
experiences of fertility treatment in the UK, in this paper, I outline the complexities of racial matching
when the goal is a black baby. I interviewed 11 black women who had received (or were currently
receiving) fertility care and 7 fertility professionals who had experience treating black patients/clients.
This paper explores the political, cultural and geographic dimensions of blackness raised by research
participants. I argue that a fluid understanding of what it means to be black (Massaquoi, 2004; Reynolds,
2005) reflects the political climate of contemporary Britain and examine how the fertility sector manages
this fluidity.


Negotiating Masculinity and Intimacy: Emotional Strategies in Chinese Men’s Fertility Practices
Jiangyi Hong
(University of Edinburgh)
In China, fertility practices remain heavily gendered, with academic and policy discourses
disproportionately framing fertility as a "woman’s issue." Men’s emotional agency—particularly their
negotiations of intimacy, masculinity, and familial duty in fertility decision-making—is critically
underexplored. This project addresses this gap by examining how married, childless men in urban
China navigate the tensions between hegemonic masculine ideals and intimate spousal relationships.
The research employs hegemonic masculinity (Connell, 1987, 1996, 2000, 2002a) and intimacy
(Jamieson, 1999, 2011; Yan, 2003, 2016a) as theoretical frameworks to construct the research.
Hegemonic masculinity, as a theoretical tool, not only aids in understanding men’s roles and identities
but also facilitates an investigation into how masculinity is constructed and interpreted within their fertility
practices. Furthermore, it explores how men position themselves in these practices. Additionally, the
research aims to examine young men and their masculinity in relation to fertility, which typically occurs
within familial contexts.
Moreover, during the fieldwork, emotions emerged as a significant factor, serving both as a lens to
analyse participants’ experiences and as a resource utilised by the participants themselves. It became
evident that men strategically deploy emotional strategies—a performative tool blending egalitarian
rhetoric with patriarchal logics—to reconcile structural marginalisation with symbolic authority. This
revealed a dynamic “emotional fluidity” in their fertility discussions, spousal negotiations, and navigation
of masculine ideals. Thus, emotions help me understand fertility practices, into a broader exploration of
how emotions are embedded in power, intimacy, and cultural continuity within contemporary Chinese
marriages.



Families & Relationships 2 - Room 4.209
From Kafā’a to Cosmopolitanism: Rethinking Marriage in Omani Society
Abdul Rahman Al Wahaibi



                                                    78
                        British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                         University of Manchester
                                                                                  Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                        Paper Session 3
                                                                                            15:30-17:00
(Sultan Qaboos University)
In April 2023, Oman introduced Royal Decree No. 23/2023, a milestone legal reform permitting Omani
citizens to marry foreigners without prior state approval. This reform has triggered a surge in cross-
national marriages, raising urgent questions about family, kinship, and cultural continuity in a rapidly
changing society. This study explores the lived experiences of Omani men married to foreign women,
situating their narratives within the tensions between tradition and modernity, kinship and individual
choice, religion and state authority.
Drawing on qualitative interviews with Omani husbands and couples, the research reveals the multi-
layered challenges and motivations underpinning such unions. Participants highlighted financial relief
from high dowry obligations, exposure to foreign cultures through travel, study, and work, and personal
convictions rooted in Islamic legitimacy as key drivers of cross-national marriage. Yet these unions also
provoked family opposition, social stigma, and bureaucratic obstacles, often described as making
marriage feel like “a crime.” At the same time, couples developed resilience strategies, such as gradual
family persuasion, framing decisions within Islamic ethics, and adopting bilingualism to bridge cultural
divides.
The findings suggest that cross-national marriages are reshaping gendered financial responsibilities,
challenging tribal concepts of kafā’a system in Oman (equivalence of social status between the husband
and wife), and testing the boundaries of national identity in Oman. By linking individual experiences to
broader socio-legal transformations, the study contributes to wider debates on marriage, kinship, and
belonging in the Global South, highlighting how globalization intersects with conservative family
structures.


Gossip & Banter: The Gendered Positioning of Language between Male and Female Spaces
Ruby Juanita Brooks
(Manchester Metropolitan University)
Historically, gossip has been used to trivialise and devalue women’s voices (Brooks, 2023). This article
addresses a gap in the literature regarding the contrast between gossip, and its male counterpart
banter, with the aim of challenging how women’s marginalisation is further perpetuated by ongoing
perceptions of women’s language as negative and unworthy. The dictionary definitions of the terms
gossip and banter are contradictory. Definitions of gossip present it as unkind, untrue and disapproving
(Cambridge Dictionary, 2025). Banter, however, is defined as a playful exchange; unserious and witty.
The contrast between a playful exchange (exchange implying active participation from both parties) and
an untrue and unkind conversation highlights the divide between male and female associated language,
and emphasises the capacity to perpetuate marginalisation. Using qualitative methods and critical
feminist methodologies, this paper draws on data collected with women early years practitioners who
were interviewed about who they talk to at work. As a working class, women dominated space, the early
years workforce presents an insightful context to explore women’s conversations and relationships.
Challenging historic negative conceptualisations of gossip, this paper offers a counter narrative,
positioning gossip as an emancipatory force in the workplace. This paper explores how women engage
in professional gossip to forge relationships and how this is perceived societally, drawing on contrasting
parallels from the masculinised concept of professional banter. The paper argues that everyday gossip
in the workplace is not just an integral part of women’s culture, but a form of resistance to patriarchal
power structures.


Forgiveness and Death
Owen Abbott
(Cardiff University)
Despite forgiveness in relationships being a prominent area of psychological and communications
studies, sociological research into the role, significance, and practice of forgiveness in personal lives is
virtually non-existent. This talk draws on a two-part qualitative study of forgiving and not forgiving in
personal relationships, the first sociological study of its kind. In both the qualitative interview responses
(n=42) and responses to the specially commissioned Mass Observation Project directive (n=117), death
was a prominent theme around which participants recounted experiences and considerations of
                                                    79
                        British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                         University of Manchester
                                                                                  Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                        Paper Session 3
                                                                                            15:30-17:00
forgiving and not forgiving. It is argued here that forgiving and not forgiving, contrary to dominant
psychological conceptions, should be seen as a social vernacular through which damaging experiences
in relationships are made sense of. Participants used vernaculars of forgiveness to interpret
relationships and experiences within them after death forecloses the possibility of relational issues being
resolved in person. I argue that the finality and pain of death acts as an interpretive juncture in
relationships, leading to contemplations of forgiving and not forgiving being deployed as a means of
making sense of unresolved issues or generally challenging relationships. For some participants
working towards forgiveness was used to facilitate grieving, whereas for others deciding not to forgive
foreclosed the need to do so. I conclude by arguing that the entwinement of death with discussions of
forgiveness is indicative of wider points firstly about the role of death in relationship interpretation, and
secondly about the use of forgiveness as a language of relational evaluation.


Patriarchy’s Hidden Costs: Towards a Theory of Masculinity Burdens
Xiaorong Gu, Xiaobing Wang
(University of Suffolk)
This paper argues that patriarchy functions less as a gender war and more as a role-based regulatory
regime—one that penalizes behavioral deviation regardless of gender categories and reinforces itself
through symbolic costs and identity sanctions. Drawing on empirical observations from families raising
children with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) in China, we compare and contrast the narratives and
behaviors of fathers and mothers, and examine how caregiving fathers incur what we conceptualize as
Extra Patriarchal Cost (EPC)—a layered burden involving cultural devaluation, symbolic punishment,
and identity dissonance. To mitigate this cost, many men adopt coping strategies such as behavioral
and discursive masking, compensatory performance of masculinity, or selective disclosure, which in
turn generate hidden coping costs that silently erode well-being and deepen internal conflict. Crucially,
these strategies feed into a self-reinforcing feedback loop: by making deviation appear socially tolerable
without challenging structural expectations, they reproduce the patriarchal logic they initially resist. This
dynamic not only limits genuine gender flexibility but obscures the depth of structural harm by
channeling it into private psychological sacrifice rather than public contestation.



Families & Relationships 3 - Room 4.211
Cockapoo Crisis! Social Tensions in Multispecies Wellbeing
Eva Giraud
(University of Sheffield)
In recent years there has been a dramatic surge in claims that particular human-animal relationships
offer win-win wellbeing benefits, which strengthen the physical and mental health of not only humans
but the other species within these relations. This paper draws upon the case study of hypoallergenic
dogs from a five-year project, ‘Multispecies Mutualisms’, that interrogates both the potentials and the
risks of multispecies relationships that are popularly presented as mutually beneficial. Drawing on
ethnographic observation of nature reserves and documentary analysis of materials from pet-focused
NGOs, the paper focuses on two interrelated social challenges that complicate wellbeing narratives
about human-dog relations by bringing their broader sociological contexts into relief. Firstly, it focuses
on an emerging set of tensions surrounding labour practices associated with the contemporary pet
industry, pertaining to dog-walking gig-work and the growth of informal markets to supply popular
breeds. Secondly, the paper reflects on how competing understandings of wellbeing (between different
groups of people, dogs, and other species) generate social tensions about access to green space. By
centring these tensions, and elucidating how competing understandings of wellbeing become
(un)resolved in practice, the paper also offers a wider intervention into approaches to conceiving of
human-dog bonds that have gathered force in social theory. In particular, the paper illustrates the need
to rethink prominent ways of conceptualising human-dog entanglements, which are grounded in
posthumanism and new materialism, by interrogating the socio-economic forces that are implicated in
these relations.



                                                      80
                          British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                           University of Manchester
                                                                                 Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                       Paper Session 3
                                                                                           15:30-17:00
Sex and Intimacy: A Three-Generational Portrait from China
Jieyu Liu
(SOAS University of London)
In recent decades, a new generation of modernity theorists have posited the democratization and
detraditionalization of intimate relationships in late modern times. China meanwhile has undergone
rapid and dramatic changes as a result of its unique trajectory of political, social and economic
development. Drawing upon 260 life history interviews with three generations of men and women in
urban and rural China, this talk contests the extent to which intimate relationships become democratized
as modernization proceeds. In particular, this talk will focus upon sexual practices – premarital sex,
conjugal sex and extramarital affairs. The Chinese narrative reveals paradoxical changes and
continuities across three generations of men and women. Despite a widening repertoire of sexual
practices and increasing emphasis on ‘pleasure’ among members of the youngest generation, gender
transcends both the urban-rural and generational divide. In pre-marital and conjugal sex, male privilege
in sexual agency and discourse permeates activities behind closed doors, where consent can be
manufactured and women are more likely to be pressured into having sex. Only extramarital affairs offer
a momentary glimpse of the ‘pure relationship’ and ‘plastic sexuality’ described by new modernity
writers.


Faith, Friendship and Fraternity: Changing Notions of Religious Homophily among Muslim
Women in a Secular State
Khadeeja Mangat, Dr.Anwar Sadath.Kt
(Independent Researcher)
Friends are often regarded as ‘comforters, confidants and soulmates’ in people’s everyday lives. Even
though they are crucial to the social fabric, friendship, as a social fact, is non-institutionalized on one
hand and rooted in structural power relations in society on the other. The literature on the socio-
historical significance of friendship demonstrates that, homophily – the idea that people’s networks and
relationships are based on similarity – is an important factor shaping people’s intimate relationships.
The paper here is an earnest attempt to understand faith, friendship and fraternity as theological as well
as sociological concepts and to analyze their relationship with institutional and cultural parameters such
as religion and gender. The study thus explores how these dynamics unfold in relation to a multicultural,
secular state. This paper critically examines the evolving notions of friendship among Muslim women
in the Malabar region of Kerala, India. It explores how religious homophily shapes these friendships
over time and investigates the role of religion and theology in defining the criteria for such homophily.
The study specifically focuses on how these dynamics unfold within the context of the immediate
neighborhood.
The changing patterns of friendship and fraternity among Muslim women in their neighborhoods is
determined by studying two generations of Muslim women. Given that religion is quintessential in the
everydayness of Muslim women in Malabar region, the paper seeks to answer questions of how
religiosity inform Muslim women’s friendship choices and everyday interaction of Muslim women in their
neighborhood within a multicultural-secular social set up.


Care and Love Practices in Romanian Father-away Transnational Families: An Ethnographic
Approach
Ioana Dobre
(University of Durham)
Approximately 26% of Romania’s population lives transnationally. This project aimed to understand
Romanian transnational fathers’ and young people’s gendered practices of care and love in the
maintenance of transnational family ties. Through multi-sited ethnographic and auto-ethnographic
methodologies, I conducted interviews and observations with transnational fathers and young adults
living in Romania, Italy, and the UK alongside my own self-reflexive journaling as a young person from
a Romanian father-away transnational family. This project found that mobility and socio-economic
factors were not the only influences in the separation and maintenance of transnational family ties as

                                                     81
                         British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                          University of Manchester
                                                                                 Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                       Paper Session 3
                                                                                           15:30-17:00
previously considered. Additionally, divorce and custody inequalities played an important role in the
formation and continuation of Romanian father-away transnational family life. Mirroring continuities and
discontinuities of transnational family life after divorce and migration, Romanian father-away families
constructed meanings of familyhood through practices of interrelated doing and caring for family through
visits, digitally mediated communication, gift exchanges, and being family through blood and
unconditionality. Romanian transnational fatherhood was also constructed around the persistence of
feeling love despite and across distance. Romanian transnational fathers’ love paralleled practices of
emotional bordering between intimacy, stoicism, disciplining, emotional, and financial provision
according to changing gender norms and financial vulnerabilities. Through an intergenerational
approach, young people often perceived an emotional gap to their fathers but would persist in doing
love and expressing understanding for their fathers’ difficult situations. These findings contribute to
sociological debates on understandings of family in times of mobility and advance meanings of
Romanian fatherhood during transnational family life.



Lifecourse - Room 4.213
Bridging Generations: An Evaluation of Intergenerational Practice in Residential Care Homes in
England
Sandra Lyndon, Denise Turner, Hilary Woodhead
(National Activity Providers Association, University of Hertfordshire, University of Chichester)

Intergenerational practice aims to create positive relationships between generations by bringing
together people of different ages to participate in shared experiences. One way of supporting
intergenerational relationships is through establishing links between residential care homes and
educational settings such as, colleges, schools and nursery schools. Although research has
demonstrated the many positive benefits of intergenerational practice for all those involved, research
particularly in the UK is limited. This presentation reports on a collaborative research project between
NAPA (National Activity Providers Association), the University of Hertfordshire, and University of
Chichester. The project aims to explore intergenerational practice within residential care homes in
England, with a focus on the type of intergenerational practice taking place, the benefits, and
challenges. Drawing on a pragmatic paradigm, a questionnaire was developed which included a mix of
both quantitative and qualitative questions, enabling us to explore both the extent and type of
intergenerational practice within the residential care homes, as well as gaining a deeper insight into the
perceived benefits and challenges. The questionnaire was distributed by NAPA (National Activity
Providers Association) to all care homes in their membership, and 65 questionnaires were returned.
Data was gathered between May 2025 and July 2025. The questionnaire was available on Microsoft
Forms and completed online via a secure link or QR code. During the presentation we will report on the
initial findings from the project including implications and recommendations for further research and
practice.


Transitioning Death: Ritual Materiality and Religious Change in Jharkhand, India
Sukanya Deogam
(Indian Institute of Technology, Gandhinagar)

This paper explores how funerary practices among the Indigenous Ho community of Jharkhand, India,
are reshaped through the intersecting forces of religious conversion, modernity, and material ritual
practice. While scholarship on death has often prioritised theological or cultural explanations, this study
highlights the semiotic and material agency of non-human elements, from the corpse itself to ritual
objects and megalithic stones in shaping the contours of mourning and memory.
Drawing on ethnographic fieldwork across two groups- the Ho, and the Ho who have embraced
Christianity- the paper examines how death rituals mediate questions of kinship, belonging, and identity.
In Ho Christian funerals, prayers at the grave and the circulation of hymns negotiate a new temporality
of salvation, while in Indigenous rites, laments, stones, and offerings sustain relationships with ancestral
spirits. Rather than simply displacing one another, these practices overlap, hybridise, and at times
create conflict, producing new forms of semiotic ideology around death and afterlife.
                                                   82
                       British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                        University of Manchester
                                                                                   Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                         Paper Session 3
                                                                                             15:30-17:00
I argue that funerary rituals in Jharkhand are not only responses to religious change but also critical
sites where histories are periodised, continuities reworked, and social futures imagined. By
foregrounding the agency of ritual materiality and the shifting semiotics of mourning, this paper
contributes to broader debates on temporality, identity, and belonging in sociology. These funerary
encounters compel us to take seriously the agency of stones, spirits, and ritual objects, and to attend
to Indigenous semiotic frameworks that challenge conventional sociological understandings of religion
and modernity.


The Absence of the Topic of Death Discussions in Schools
Billie Daniels
(Independent Researcher)
Death is an intriguing subject because it is everywhere but nowhere. Death is something everyone will
experience for themselves, but no one can ever really know. We cannot comment or reflect on our own
death after the fact, and we can only experience and survive it indirectly as we live through the death
of others.
Death is indeed a fascinating topic, but it is one which is rarely discussed in an open and frank way
especially between adults and children. Although death is an emotional topic, this should not be a
reason for restricted conversations. As a topic, death is one which should be discussed more freely and
more often by everyone.
Education plays a crucial role in developing attitudes and although death is discussed through subjects
such as religious education and literature in schools, this is not the same as having actual conversations
about death itself, and by doing so such conversation would become more commonplace in wider
society. Given that the core purpose of the National Curriculum itself is to prepare children for the future
and death is an inescapable part of our future, it is a topic worthy of discussion, especially in light of the
Covid 19 pandemic. To understand the reasons for the absence of death as a topic in a school
curriculum I combine a genealogical approach to trace the concept of habitus with a psychosocial
theoretical framework.



Medicine, Health & Illness - Room 3.209
Black Freebirth Choices in England as a Tool to Decolonise Maternity Care
Elsie Gayle
(Mimosa Midwives)
This paper considers the experiential journey of black mothers through the UK maternity care pathway
in England who choose to be unattended throughout their childbearing continuum, despite free access
to NHS midwives as the specialists for birth. The paper discusses the maternal decision making
process. A lawful choice, ‘freebirth’ statistics are unknown, largely unresearched and leaves the
parturient woman open to variable support and treatment from professionals during the childbearing
year.
Background: UK midwifery is based in ‘woman centred maternity care’. Regulatory and national policies
require clinicians to ‘meet the needs and values’ of service users.
Midwives are the responsible and accountable specialist who provide preconceptual, antenatal, birth
and postnatal care up to 28 days following the birth. This includes preventative measures, detection of
deviations from the norm, making direct referral for medical care and are equipped to carry out
emergency measures. Midwives practise in the home, community settings and hospitals.
Research into the first 1001 days of life shows how the treatment of mothers impacts the neurological
development of the developing brain, from the womb to the tomb and intergenerationally.
The longstanding, unique annual ‘Confidential Enquiry into Maternal Deaths’ reveals a consistent,
intransigent disparity in mortality and morbidity outcomes for the black mother-baby dyad.

                                                    83
                        British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                         University of Manchester
                                                                                 Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                       Paper Session 3
                                                                                           15:30-17:00
Every investigation into a myriad of individual UK maternity services, continues to describe fragmented
models with hierarchical power inequalities, with cultures of bullying and coercion. Women repeatedly
complain of not being listened to, being racially stereotyped and experiencing high degrees of physical
and psychological trauma.


Cultural Barriers in Frailty and Dementia Care: GP Perspectives on Assessing Older South Asian
and Muslim Adults
Sheinaz Stanfield, Nazrul Hussain, Katie Brittain, Benjamin Ajibade, Lesley Geddes, Alison Steven,
Zeb Sattar
(Northumbria University)
This study explores the perceptions of GPs and primary care staff on their experiences of engaging
with older South Asian and Muslim (SAM) adults with a focus on frailty and dementia assessments. The
UK’s population has become more ethnically diverse than a decade, with increases across all identifying
ethnic groups. Despite this shift, there is a remains little academic knowledge on the cultural
appropriateness of assessment tools used by GPs and primary care staff.
A co-designed qualitative study recruited twenty-seven participants. Public Involvement and Community
Engagement (PICE) members contributed throughout the research process from study design to data
analysis. Three key themes were identified using reflexive thematic analysis
    a. Appropriateness of resources in diverse cultures.
    b. Implications of interpreting and case finding; and
    c. The need for community-based care for older SAM populations.
Results showed there were language barriers, but cultural barriers were perceived more significant.
Participants reported difficulties using standard frailty and dementia assessments, particularly, because
patients would present with chronic conditions and were culturally unfamiliar with concepts of dementia
and frailty. Subtle changes in patients’ health were often missed due to linguistic and cultural
misunderstandings. GP visits to care homes were seen as inappropriate for older SAM adults because
of limited recognition of religious practices and dietary requirements, and a reluctance by participants
to refer their patients to such settings.
This study highlights the need for culturally adapted dementia and frailty assessment tools, better
awareness of the intersection between ethnicity, faith, and ageing and community care-based care
models


‘The Sacred Status’, ‘Silenced Voices’ and ‘Lowered Gazes’: Women’s Bodies, Power Politics
and the Dynamics of ‘Altruistic’ Surrogacy in India Today
Pratyasha Sahoo
(Lakshmibai College, University of Delhi)
The Surrogacy Regulation Act of 2021 bans commercial surrogacy and mandates ‘altruistic surrogacy'
in India. ‘Altruism is the 'new normal’ within the current discourse. The ground reality, however, disputes
this normative ideal with broader anxieties surrounding motherhood, women’s reproductive rights, their
bodily autonomy/agency. As this Act appears to be ambiguous, perilous, less supervised and fraught
with the danger of undesirable difficulties, the present paper attempts to look at it from the perspective
of both infertile couples and surrogate mothers in India. Altruistic surrogacy acts as a double-edged
sword. While an infertile woman loses her ‘sacred status’ within the conventional Indian society; the
paper contends that surrogacy cannot be a reliable choice for such women to complete their families.
Synonymously, the Act specifies that surrogate mothers should minimize the financial component,
consider it a providential dispensation and then generously engage themselves in this act of ‘altruism’
while birthing and gifting babies. The paper also foregrounds a revealing contradiction between the
state’s responsibility to uphold principles of mothering and morality on the one hand, while on the other,
it stands morally indifferent to the financial disabilities of poor women from Third World nations like
India. In the process, their ‘sense of agency’, or ‘choice’ is dismissed and undermined. The qualms
faced by clinics, surrogate mothers and intending couples to adhere to multiple legal compliances is


                                                   84
                       British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                        University of Manchester
                                                                                 Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                       Paper Session 3
                                                                                           15:30-17:00
symptomatic of a complex political negotiation and a deeper sociological tension. Voices in the form of
narratives of 10 surrogate mothers and infertile couples have been captured.


The Projection of Male Gaze in Medicine: A Feminist Science Analysis of PCOS and Biomedical
Treatment Models
Ayeshna Dutta
(Kishinchand Chellaram College)
It has been very well established by the Women’s Health Movement of the 1960’s that women and all
bodies that identify as female have been marginalized and exclude from health care practices. This
paper looks at the construction and projection of the male gaze in medicine using feminist methodology
of standpoint and situatedness. The paper aims at understanding the ways in which biomedicine
excludes women’s lived experiences in the treatment of PCOS. PCOS (Polycystic Ovarian Syndrome)
is a complex hormonal condition found in women/bodies having ovaries belonging to the reproductive
age. Using a Feminist Science Studies framework, it establishes a critique of the bio medical models of
treating PCOS that completely overshadows and silences women’s idea of their own bodies. It attempts
to highlight how women’s bodies becomes site of construction of the male gaze that is projected through
medicine, science and technology. While medicine is assumed to be the only way of treating bodily
conditions, the paper explores the interconnectedness between the male gaze and the medical gaze.
It responds to critical questions that the discipline of Sociology and Feminist Science Studies raises to
highlight how and why women have been left out of dominant knowledge production systems.



Methodological Innovations - Room 4.206
Positionality as Assemblage: Toward Non-confessional Reflexivity in Postcolonial Research
Kaustubh Jagtap
(University of Sheffield)

This paper critically examines the confessional mode that dominates positionality statements in
contemporary social research, arguing that for postcolonial subjects navigating multiple systems of
meaning, transparent self-disclosure may be neither possible nor desirable. The confessional format—
with its demand for coherent self-accounting—risks becoming another site where postcolonial
researchers must speak in the master’s language, using the master’s categories, reproducing the very
structures of knowledge/power they seek to challenge.
Drawing on poststructural critiques of authorship and confession, feminist epistemologies of embodied
and relational knowing, and postcolonial theories of hybridity, ambivalence, and strategic essentialism,
this paper proposes an alternative: treating positionality not as a fixed property to be declared, but as a
topological surface that folds and refolds through actual encounters.
Through ethnographic vignettes—plateaus—from PhD fieldwork in Mumbai, traversing elite
bureaucracies, informal settlements, and intimate domestic worlds, the paper demonstrates how
positionality is continuously composed rather than occupied, and can only be fully understood in the act
of composition itself. The plateaus reveal position not as a stable coordinate but as a provisional
assemblage, continuously negotiated through tactical, contradictory labour where motion and
translation are constitutive of positionality itself.
By offering an assemblage rather than a confession, this approach acknowledges that for subjects
partially opaque to themselves, accountability takes different forms. Recognising what is contingent and
incoherent in oneself may allow one to affirm others who do not mirror one's own constitution, raising
questions about whose voices have been legible within existing methodological conventions and what
might make space for differently situated knowers.




                                                    85
                        British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                         University of Manchester
                                                                               Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                     Paper Session 3
                                                                                         15:30-17:00
(Re)Memory, Race and the Potential of Synesthetic Ethnographies of Pain and Sexual Violence
Ulla McKnight, Sarah Milton
(University of Sussex)
This paper proposes a methodological intervention for sociology, developed through an AHRC project.
It draws on life-history narratives of racialised and migrant women reflecting on reproductive pain and
sexual violence, alongside a (non)maternal archive. This archive gathers sensory content linked to past
or future selves or meaningful others (such as (imagined) children or grandchildren), with contributions
including photographs, recipes, clothes, and recordings. Artists were commissioned to create depictions
in response, extending the archive through interpretation.
To expand ethnographic practice, I turn to interdisciplinary resources, most centrally Toni Morrison’s
concept of (re)memory in Beloved (1987) and Khenshti’s notion of Hurstonian synaesthesia, inspired
by Zora Neale Hurston’s claim that “we see with the skin.” These orientations open ethnography to what
is often unsayable: the sensory, affective, and embodied residues of trauma.
Here, novels are not simply literary texts or sources of comfort. They act as embodied, talismanic forces
that evoke, contain, transmit, and transform pain. Morrison’s Beloved and Hurston’s ethnographic
writings operate across temporal, bodily, and affective registers. They resonate with Avery Gordon’s
(1997) insistence that haunting is a method: an attunement to what persists across time and space,
connecting racialised experiences of pain that remain unspoken yet deeply felt.
By weaving archive, art, and literature into ethnographic practice, I argue for a Hurstonian-synaesthetic
methodology that listens for what is obscured, unsayable, or denied. This approach highlights the
spectral and extra-worldly dimensions of racialised pain while offering new tools for apprehending
suffering and its afterlives across bodies, histories, and temperalities.


Introducing Africanist Sista-hood Methodology: A Novel Approach for Understanding what
Equality, Diversity and Inclusion (EDI) Mean to Africanist Diasporic Women in UK Higher
Education
Rachel Odufuwa
(Lancaster University)
[Dear Sista],
Because of [Sistas] who came before us, we are free
To challenge the Eurocentric mentality,
We’re free to express our frustration, we’re free to complain
As empowered women, our [(re) Sista-nce] will never wane.
(Gabriel, 2017, p. ix)
I open with this love letter poem to introduce Africanist Sista-hood methodology— a valuable
methodology for understanding what EDI means to Africanist Diasporic Women in UK Higher Education.
Africanist Sista-hood methodology builds on Africanist Sista-hood in Britain, a theoretical framework
developed by Chijioke Obasi (2019), which centers the experiences of Africanist Diasporic Women in
Britain and their ‘collectivity, connectivity, commonality and difference’ (ibid., p. 229). Building on
Africanist Sista-hood in Britain, I introduce Africanist Sista-hood methodology—a culturally situated
methodological framework which centers how Africanist Diasporic Women are creating their own
pathways and developing methods built around self-naming and our epistemic qualities.
Within my PhD research, I have been using Sista Circles and Sista-to-Sista Conversations which
attempt to re-name focus groups and interviews on our own terms, whilst also centering our
epistemologies—dialogue between the Black woman researcher and the Black woman participant (s).
Africanist Sista-hood methodology builds on the ongoing work by Black female qualitative researchers
to merge tools of qualitative inquiry with cultural knowledge to produce work of scholarly relevance, and
of relevance to the Black female community. Through dialogic conversations, my PhD research reveals
how Africanist Diasporic Women are creating our Africanist Sista-hood social imaginaries of EDI, which
are in (re) Sista-nce to UK Higher Education understandings of EDI.



                                                     86
                         British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                          University of Manchester
                                                                                  Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                        Paper Session 3
                                                                                            15:30-17:00
Beyond an Ethics of Care: Reflections on Engaging the Black Radical Imagination
Annabel Wilson, Claire Neaves, Vivian Látìnwọ̀-Ọlájídé
(University of Oxford)
What is care, beyond the ethical concern of protection from harm? Care, as a practice of love and
relationality, is rarely considered a central principle of research. Whilst there is no definitive definition
of what care in research should look like, there is a need for meaningful reflection on what reparative
justice through research could be. This paper supports researchers in recentring care as a practice of
repair by considering opportunities for healing within research design. In this paper, we outline 10
principles of care integral to our social research practices. To illustrate this, we discuss 'Engaging the
Black Radical Imagination', a project that worked with Black Bristolians, centring on conviviality,
imagination, and Joy, as they reimagined an alternative future for education in their city using poetry
and film. This paper then considers how to balance researchers’ need to know with making space for
discussions of trauma/ vulnerability through prioritising conviviality.



Race, Ethnicity & Migration 1 - Room 2.217
The Poetics of Political Becoming in Colonial Qatar
Maryam AlHajri
(University of Edinburgh)
This paper investigates how artistic and cultural production in colonial Qatar registered repression while
sustaining political imagination under tightening authoritarian rule. Focusing on the 1950s–60s, a period
of insurgency and colonial repression, I draw on a counter-archive of poems, magazines, and novels
that mediated colonial violence and authoritarian consolidation while preserving suppressed histories
and reconfiguring what could be seen, said, and remembered. I ask: How did cultural forms in 1960s
Qatar make violence, loss, and alienation perceptible in a context where dissent was silenced? In what
ways did poems, magazines, and novels enact dissensus and create spaces of political imagination?
How do their afterlives preserve traces of erased histories and open spaces for an otherwise? I position
cultural texts as key sites where dissent left its trace and where collective imaginaries of liberation
persisted, even as the state closed avenues of mobilisation. I show how cultural production in colonial
and postcolonial Qatar reconfigured the field of perception—what Rancière calls the distribution of the
sensible—by creating spaces of dissensus outside state control. Texts such as Al-Watan magazine,
produced by the short-lived cultural club Al-Taliʿah, poems of the oil era, and Noora Al-Saad’s novel Al-
ʿAridah exemplify these insurgent practices. Drawing on Fanon’s conceptualisation of subjectivity, I
trace how these sites of aesthetic politics constituted forms of becoming in and through colonialism
itself—emerging from its violence while working against it. In this sense, dissensus and counter-
archives in mid-twentieth-century Qatar made equality perceptible, preserved suppressed histories, and
illuminated the unfinished demands of earlier mobilisations.


Problem Spaces and Policy Shifts: A Sociological Lens on Afghan Resettlement in England
Caroline Oliver, Louise Ryan
(University College London)
Research on migrant urban reception explores inclusive or sanctuary cities, the role of ‘arrival
infrastructures’, and the tensions and alignments between local and national responses in multi-level
governance. This paper draws on a Nuffield Foundation-funded mixed methods study of the UK
government resettlement schemes for Afghans, while also reflecting on the methodological implications
of working in this space.
The resettlement schemes responded to the chaotic evacuation following the Taliban takeover in 2021,
navigating extended placements of Afghans in bridging hotels and military sites during the Covid
pandemic, a major data breach, and frequent policy changes. A range of actors across international,
national, and local levels, managed responsibilities from evacuation and housing to healthcare and
social cohesion.

                                                     87
                         British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                          University of Manchester
                                                                                Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                      Paper Session 3
                                                                                          15:30-17:00
Whilst the central focus of our research is with Afghans, a key strand involved research with
stakeholders. We draw on data from collaboration with five English councils, three strategic migration
partnerships, over 40 stakeholder interviews (including government and commissioned civil society
organisations), and three roundtables with 45 participants from 30 local council resettlement teams.
Substantively, we explore the varying perspectives on the schemes, and how far stakeholders viewed
them as offering genuine ‘safe and legal passage’ as promised by the government.
Methodologically, we engage with Celia Lury’s (2020) notion of ‘problem spaces’, where sociological
problems are not pre-given, but transformed and shaped through engagement. This framing highlights
the evolving nature of social inquiry in the complex and fast-paced field of migration governance and
the need for reflexive, situated approaches to understanding complex policy landscapes.


Switching, Blending or Distancing? Transformations of National Identity among Chinese in
Britain
Dongwei Wang
(University of Edinburgh)
Given that national identity is shaped by historical, political, and local contexts, it is worthwhile to
examine the shifting and contested nature of interpreting ‘Chineseness’ across different generations of
Chinese migrants. Existing studies have laid a foundation for comparing distinctions in how diasporas
narrate cultural and ethnic identity through engagements in language, artistic performances, and festive
celebrations. However, there is a lack of discussion about how Chinese migrants and their descendants
articulate national identity and their nuanced understandings of ‘Chineseness’. In this intervention, I
examine how national identity is understood and performed by first-generation, 1.5-generation, and
British Born Chinese in the context of globalisation and glocalisation. Drawing on in-depth interviews in
four UK cities with long-standing historical and contemporary connections to Chinese communities, I
establish how identity has been switched, blended, and distanced across different generations. Using
the concept of notional ‘others’ from David McCrone and Frank Bechhofer and Michael Billig’s banal
nationalism as analytical lenses, the findings show that social and symbolic boundaries of identity are
reinforced by the presence of notional ‘others’, and the respondents frequently negotiate these relational
dynamics with a high level of reflexivity. This study indicates that an ‘in-between’ national identity and
a ‘betwixt-and-between’ transnationalism are banally reproduced across generations in everyday
activities, which are crucial locations for identity (trans)formation.


Dwelling in Istanbul: Spaces of Exclusion and Spatial Practices of Solidarity
Dogus Simsek
(Kingston University London)
This article explores the dynamics of solidarity among migrant groups in Istanbul through three
interrelated questions: to what extent do migrants and refugees mobilise solidarity to contest exclusion,
racism, and neoliberal governance; how such solidarities reconfigure notions of belonging; and whether
they also reproduce hierarchies of urban belonging among different migrant and refugee groups.
Exclusion is shaped not only by precarious housing, exploitative labour markets, and limited welfare,
but also by surveillance, policing, and racialised discourses that mark migrants and refugees as
“undesirable.” Yet alongside these constraints, fragile solidarities emerge through practices of
cohabitation, care, and collective survival in neighbourhoods marked by displacement. Drawing on
ethnographic fieldwork conducted between 2022 and 2024 in Kumkapı, Dolapdere, and Zeytinburnu,
the article shows how solidarities are forged yet fractured within conditions of inequality, surveillance,
and legal precarity. By focusing on spaces of exclusion and spatial practices of solidarity, it highlights
the dialectic between constraint and possibility. I argue that dwelling in the city is co-produced and
contested, shaped by structural marginalisation and the hierarchies of urban belonging, encompassing
a range of factors, including race, ethnicity, class, gender, and migratory status. Solidarities, however,
are partial and uneven, underscoring that shared marginalisation does not automatically translate into
collective bonds across migrant groups.




                                                   88
                       British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                        University of Manchester
                                                                                 Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                       Paper Session 3
                                                                                           15:30-17:00

Race, Ethnicity & Migration 2 - Room 2.218
Negotiating Masculinity in Migrant Families: Afghan Men in the UK
Sayed Mahdi Mosawi
(University of Edinburgh)
This paper aims to understand the dynamics of migrant masculinities within the family in a transnational
context. It specifically focuses on Afghan male immigrants living in the UK and explores how migration
reshapes their practices and ideals of manhood in the family. Drawing on ethnographic research,
participant observation and in-depth semi structured interviews the study highlighting the relational and
intersectional dynamics of changes and continuities with the masculinity adapted before immigration.
The findings reveal that migration introduces different patterns of change: some men adapt and expand
their understanding of what it means to be a man in the family, while others struggle to reconcile
traditional expectations with new socio-cultural realities. These negotiations affect household labour
divisions, decision-making, and intimate relationships, producing diverse patterns of gender practice.
The paper especially highlightes contributes to the sociological research on men and masculinities and
migration studies and demonstrates that masculinities are fluid, socially constructed, and continuously
renegotiated rather than fixed. The research contributes to sociological discussions on migration,
gender, and family by underscores the importance of understanding migrant masculinities not in
isolation but as dynamically intertwined with broader social, cultural, and economic structures.


European Ethnics Became White Americans Only When Non-Europeans Arrived: A Three-Group
Assimilation Hypothesis
Aryan Karimi, Rima Wilkes
(University of British Columbia)
Segmented and neo-assimilation theories posit that socioeconomic status (SES) mobility led ethnic
Europeans to assimilate. Yet, recent longitudinal data do not show widespread SES mobility among
ethnic Europeans in the 20th century. Hence there must be a different cause of their assimilation. We
propose that it was boundary expansion by the white Anglo-Saxons. To build this boundary model, we
rely on the broader sociological theories of boundary-work. These theories posit that each group self-
identifies vis-à-vis an Other group and, consequently, that self and Other cannot completely assimilate
to become one and dissolve the us-them binary. Accordingly, our three-group hypothesis proffers that
the post-1965 arrival of non-Europeans created a three-group scenario with Anglo-Saxons, ethnics, and
non-Europeans. Then, regardless of SES, the boundary of Anglo-Saxon whiteness could expand to
include the European ethnics. Without the third group, ethnic Europeans, at least some of them, would
remain non-assimilated. We also discuss the implications for non-European immigrants.


What is the Race of “Refugee” in the 21st Century? Afghans’ Self-identification as Refugees and
Ukrainians’ Self-identification as Immigrants in Canada
Aryan Karimi
(University of British Columbia)
There is a difference between refugee as a top-down legal category and refugee as a bottom-up self-
identification label. Refugee studies literature underlines that legal categories, in the public discourse,
carry positive and pejorative meanings and that, consequently, these categories shape policies and
how recipient societies perceive refugee populations. Instead, in this study, based on 80 semi-
structured interviews with Ukrainians and Afghans in Canada, we explore how these categories inform
individuals’ self-identification to be a refugee. We analyze the postcolonial context and discourse,
globally and in Canada, wherein the refugee category emerged and became a racialized-classed label
over time in the 21st century. Against this background, our data show that, although Ukrainians and
Afghans are similarly displaced from war-torn homelands, they have disparate relations with being a
refugee. Ukrainians emphasize their European racial and cultural origin and contrast it with the non-
white racial and class status associated with refugee category. Our Ukrainian participants self-identified
as immigrants. Afghan participants did not question the racial-class meanings of being a refugee and

                                                   89
                       British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                        University of Manchester
                                                                                 Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                       Paper Session 3
                                                                                           15:30-17:00
presented themselves as the emblematic refugees whose only path to safety is the current refugee
policy in Canada. Our study contributes to the refugee studies literature on the consequences of refugee
labels.


For the Abolition of Integration Courses? An Abolitionist Critique of the German Integration
Regime
Marija Cubalevska, Melissa Silva
(University of Bremen, University of Würzburg)

This paper offers a theoretical contribution that brings abolitionist perspectives into dialogue with adult
education to interrogate state-led “integration courses” in Germany and the wider DACH region. While
these courses are framed as tools of social inclusion, critical research has long shown how they
reproduce paternalism, racialized hierarchies, and the binary between “us” and “the others.” More
broadly, the discourse of integration has been criticized as a form of methodological nationalism,
entangled with colonial imaginaries and exclusionary assumptions about belonging. Abolitionist theory,
rooted in struggles against slavery and extended through critiques of prisons, police, psychiatry,
schools, and the nuclear family, provides a radical lens for examining how institutions perpetuate
structural violence. Read against adult education, abolitionism exposes the ambivalent position of
educational practices as both stabilizers of social order and potential sites of transformation. This
contribution does not present empirical findings but rather develops a conceptual framework by
systematically reinterpreting migration-pedagogical critiques of integration courses through an
abolitionist lens. In doing so, it develops two theoretical insights: first, it highlights how abolitionist
thought unsettles dominant narratives of integration, illuminating the structural violence underpinning
migration regimes; second, it explores how adult education with and for refugees might be reconfigured
through “non-reformist reforms” to dismantle, rather than reproduce, inequalities. By reframing
integration courses through abolitionism, the paper speaks to broader sociological concerns on shifting
formations of inequality, contested notions of belonging, and the search for new conceptual tools to
critique and reimagine contemporary social orders.



Race, Ethnicity & Migration 3 - Room 2.219
Thailand’s Migration Paradox: The Political Economy of State Control and Migrant Labour Flows
Chittranut Kiatadisorn
(Nanyang Technological University)

Thailand plays a unique role as both an importer and exporter of migrant labour. While Thailand’s
economic development has long been heavily dependent on rural-to-urban domestic labour migration,
the number of outmigration workers has increased substantially since the 1990s. At the same time,
Thailand has become increasingly reliant on migrant workers from neighboring countries. This raises
two related questions: Why is Thailand both a migrant labor importer and exporter? Who is involved in
shaping Thailand’s migration dynamics?
To answer these questions, this research explores the political economy of labor migration governance
in Thailand, focusing on how state institutions, brokers, and migration networks shape migration flows
and how migrant workers navigate these structures using the “migration infrastructure concept” (Xiang
& Lindquist, 2014) and “autonomy of migration concept” (Scheel 2019).
With the ethnographic fieldwork and policy analysis, this study will examine three dimensions of
Thailand’s migration governance:
    1. The factors shaping Thailand’s multiple migration systems (internal rural-to-urban migration,
       labor outmigration to foreign countries, and import of foreign migrant labor)
    2. The role of migration brokers and the state
    3. The resistance and negotiation of migrants and activists in respond to authoritarian migration
       controls.


                                                     90
                         British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                          University of Manchester
                                                                                 Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                       Paper Session 3
                                                                                           15:30-17:00
This research will contribute to broader discussions on authoritarianism and labor governance by
studying Thailand’s labor governance and migration control mechanisms. This research will also
broaden the geography of migration sociology, offering insights from Southeast Asia that can dialougue
with global framework.


Social Construction of Scapegoting: Scapegoating of Forced Migrants and Refugees from the
Global South to Global North
Ali Vedadhir
(University of Tehran and University of Bristol)

Across the Global South and the Global North, state responses to crises e.g., wars and armed conflicts,
resource insecurities, refugee flows, economic sanctions, pandemics, antimicrobial resistance, and
climate change reveal more than governance. They indeed demonstrate a politics or game of blame.
Too often, public policies are reactive, fragmented, and mismanaged, intensifying inequalities and
worsening the living and working conditions of already disadvantaged communities. A particularly
troubling and persistent feature is the scapegoating of forced migrants and refugees. As socio-culturally
marginalised and politically voiceless, these groups are commonly transformed into symbolic culprits
for systemic failures they neither caused nor controlled.
This pattern is visible across contexts. In the US, Mexicans and Muslims have been somehow vilified;
in the UK, Brexit-era debates cast migration as destabilising. Across Europe, the reception of Syrian
and Afghan refugees has sparked similar contestations. In Türkiye, nearly four million refugees are
politicised in national debates, while Russia redirects discontent toward migrants from former Soviet
republics. In Pakistan and Iran, Afghan refugees remain enduring scapegoats—most recently through
the forced return of nearly two million Afghans. These narratives shape public opinion and penetrate
the everyday lives, emotions, and futures of migrants.
Taking a social constructionist perspective, this paper comparatively addresses how states and other
claims-makers employ ideologies, rhetorical strategies, and symbolic framings to redirect crises onto
migrants. Scapegoating functions not only as a tool to manage public sentiment but also as a
mechanism to obscure structural and institutional weaknesses, with lasting consequences for migrants’
dignity, security, and belonging.


Student Migrants and Volunteer Organisations: Navigating Inclusion and Discrimination in
Germany, Japan, and the UK
Polina Ivanova
(University of Bremen)
This study examines how student migrants engage with volunteer organisations in their host countries
and how these interactions shape experiences of loneliness, inclusion and belonging. It explores how
students navigate structural inequalities, discrimination, and everyday racism, and how they seek and
sometimes find refuge in civil society spaces.
Using a mixed-methods design, the study combines online surveys and semi-structured interviews with
international students, university staff and members of volunteer organisations in Germany, Japan, and
the UK. It focuses on bottom-up practices initiated by students and local organisations, while critically
analysing the structural and institutional barriers that constrain student migrants’ social and educational
trajectories.
The findings reveal tensions between transnational aspirations and local realities. Despite national
policies promoting high-skilled migration and “global talent” in all the three countries, international
students encounter bureaucratic hurdles, restrictive visa regimes, and everyday discrimination to a
varying degree, depending on their country of origin, appearance and financial status. Volunteer
organisations attempt to provide spaces of inclusion and mitigate social inequalities, yet they remain
limited in addressing broader structural contradictions shaping student migrants’ experiences.
This paper contributes to debates on migration, racialisation, and migrant wellbeing by showing how
student migrants’ engagement in civil society both reflects and contests systemic inequalities. The

                                                     91
                         British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                          University of Manchester
                                                                                Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                      Paper Session 3
                                                                                          15:30-17:00
comparative perspective across Germany, Japan, and the UK highlights how local contexts shape
migrant experiences, offering insights into the interplay between individual agency, collective practices,
and institutional constraints in transnational higher education.



Science, Technology & Digital Studies -
Room 3.205
Artificial Intelligence and the Reconfiguration of Worker Agency
Mariachiara Barzotto
(University of Bath)
The growing deployment of artificial intelligence (AI) in workplaces poses fundamental questions for
sociological understandings of control, resistance, and worker agency. Far from being neutral tools,
algorithmic systems reorganise the labour process by redistributing discretion, redefining managerial
authority, and introducing new forms of surveillance and regulation. This article explores how AI
unsettles taken-for-granted assumptions about initiative, responsibility, and participation at work,
situating these shifts within the broader dynamics of digital capitalism. Drawing on labour process theory
and critical sociology of work, it examines the tensions AI generates between autonomy and control,
visibility and opacity, empowerment and subordination. By foregrounding these contradictions, the
paper calls for a rethinking of worker agency under algorithmic management and highlights the
implications for inequality, collective organisation, and the future of work.


AI as a Friend, Therapist, Lover? New Digital Intimacies and Technoeconomies of Care
Ash Watson, James Frederick Green, Maria Volkova
(University of New South Wales)

This paper critically examines the emotional and relational dynamics of AI companionship, sharing
findings from an international qualitative project involving interviews with people who have developed
relationships with chatbots such as Replika and ChatGPT. Participants describe their AI companions in
deeply relational terms: friend, therapist, colleague, coach, even spouse. Drawing on Hochschild’s work
on the public and/or private emotional system, we explore how users navigate the normative terrain of
emotional expression in relationships with AI through a focus on social/emotional norms and emergent
digital intimacies. We explore how AI companionship constitutes a novel site for emotion
work/management, social exchange and feeling rules, where users engage in affective interactions that
are both personally meaningful and socially ambiguous. We see that the ‘pinch’ between what one feels
and what one ought to feel (Hochschild, 1983) can be especially pronounced in these relationships,
prompting users to seek interpretive communities to make sense of their attachments. We consider
these communities as affective infrastructures, helping users reconcile their emotional experiences with
dominant discourses of authenticity, sentience and the “real.” Too, we reflect on the commodification of
intimacy: how subscription models, aesthetic customisations and tiered access further complicate these
exchanges and embed an emotional system within AI economies. Our paper aims to contribute to
critical contemporary debates on AI and the reconfiguration of intimacy, boundaries of personhood and
the affective politics of human-machine interaction.


Large Language Models and the Future of Qualitative Research
Susan Halford, Les Carr
(University of Bristol)
The growth of Large Language Models (LLMs) has prompted widespread claims that these ‘tools’ will
transform the future of qualitative research. These are explored in a substantial body of literature,
reporting practical experiments which examine the opportunities and challenges of LLMs for qualitative
research and offer guidelines for their effective and ethical use. Overall, the message is qualitative
researchers should equip themselves for a fast approaching future, or risk irrelevance.

                                                      92
                          British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                           University of Manchester
                                                                                     Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                           Paper Session 3
                                                                                               15:30-17:00
In this talk we take a different framing. First, rather than seeing the research described above as a
timely response to a future that awaits us, it can be seen as an increasingly coherent set of future-
making claims. Second, Rather than seeing LLMs as discrete ‘tools’ that offer a better (or worse) way
of doing qualitative research, they can be seen as the focal point for a network of actors, practices and
relations that may transform ways of knowing and the wider knowledge economy.
Pulling these two elements together, the current debate about LLMs in qualitative research can be seen
as future making practices, mobilized through a nascent re-assembling of the dominant methodological
apparatus. To explore this we report on our own experiments. This suggests, to us at least, a rather
different way of thinking about LLMs and the future of qualitative research.


Sociology as a Vocation in the Age of Artificial Intelligence
Richard Randell
(Institute for Advanced Study)

“If people cannot write well, they cannot think well, and if they cannot think well, others will do their
thinking for them.” Attributed to George Orwell but possibly apocryphal, this aphorism assumes a
distinction between thinking and writing. It is a distinction that holds only if we take writing in the literal
sense of pen-paper or keyboard-computer, and take thinking as something done inside one’s head.
Alphabetic language, the first of which was ancient Greek, is a technology by which any spoken
language can be represented in phonetic writing. Spoken language and thinking itself, conversely, are
reflexively also a form of alphabetic writing. If thinking is writing and writing is thinking, a world saturated
with AI generated text would be a world wherein our thinking is done for us by AI. To assume that the
technology that is AI is a neutral tool—which thought is a thought that is being thought for us by others—
is to be delivered over to technology, as Martin Heidegger observed, in the worst possible way. Of
course, “others” have been doing our thinking for us before the advent of AI. The challenge is to identify
what kind of thinking AI writing might be. One of the primary workday activities of sociologists, as it is
in most academic disciplines, is the interpretation and writing (they are the same thing) of texts. This
paper addresses the question of what a sociology that has outsourced its writing work to AI might look
like.



Social Divisions / Social Identities 1 -
Lecture Theatre A
Twenty-first Century Butlers and the New Spirit of Service
Bryan Boyle
(Max Planck Institute for the Study of Societies)

In the 1970s, Lewis Coser argued that the “servant” occupation has become obsolete, citing the decline
of the old domestic service regime. He also theorised that such occupations could not function without
“premodern” religious and ascriptive ideologies. More than fifty years later, there is reason to suggest
that Coser spoke too soon; the number of people working in domestic service has risen, including the
type of private service roles in elite households that Coser had in mind. In this paper, I review Coser’s
claims by drawing from a recent ethnography that involved training and working as a butler and
conducting interviews with butlers in private service (N=24). In the absence of the religious ideologies
that indeed permeated the old service workforce, I identify a “new spirit of service” among twenty-first
century roles. This spirit is defined by: (1) necessity, as butlers typically first entered the wider hospitality
industry in the absence of desirable alternatives; (2) professionalism, as butlers engage in a kind of
“service illusio” characterised by a desire to deliver “high levels of service”; and (3) misrecognition,
whereby working for elites themselves bears its own allure and appeal, including the chance for butlers
to vicariously consume a lifestyle that they cannot otherwise access. Although, here, servanthood and
social class are expressed through the more modern mediums of professionalism and lifestyle, the new
spirit secures consent to old working conditions. These include highly diffuse obligations, a
particularistic style of service, and near-total loyalty to one’s elite employer.

                                                     93
                         British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                          University of Manchester
                                                                                 Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                       Paper Session 3
                                                                                           15:30-17:00
Disabled-Queer Student Experiences in Scottish Higher Education
Jack McKinlay
(University of Strathclyde)
More than two decades ago, Harley et al. (2002) identified disabled-queer students as one of the most
marginalised and under-researched groups in academia. Despite some progress, this remains true,
with much scholarship centred on the US and focused primarily on classroom experiences (Miller, 2015;
Kimball et al., 2016; Peña, Stapleton, & Schaffer, 2016). This narrow lens risks overlooking other sites
of the student experience, including social spaces, accommodation, student services, and transitions
in and out of university.
This presentation addresses this gap by exploring disabled-queer student experiences in Scottish
higher education, a national context often framed as progressive, ‘different’, and separate from
Westminster politics (Taylor, 2023). Drawing on qualitative interviews with 21 disabled-queer students,
it explores how universities are experienced as both sites of opportunity and exclusion, shaped by
heteronormative and able-bodied ideals of the ‘good student’. Participants describe navigating
community, isolation, systemic barriers, and tensions between institutional policies and lived realities.
By foregrounding disabled-queer narratives, this research contributes to sociological understandings of
intersectional inequalities and the identity of Scottish higher education. It critically interrogates how
inclusivity is imagined versus enacted, and the extent to which national narratives of progressiveness
resonate with students’ lived experiences. The findings offer insight into how universities might better
support intersectional identities, extending discussions of student experience beyond the classroom
and beyond US-centric contexts.

Social Divisions / Social Identities 2 - Room 1.218
Indigenous Girls and the Postfeminist Green Gaze: Fashioning Climate Activism in Vogue
Chloe Dawson
(Keele University)
This paper examines how postfeminist discourse has recently been entangled with sustainability
narratives in fashion magazine, Vogue, revealing the ways environmental activism is shaped by the
same logics of empowerment, positivity, and individual choice that define postfeminism. While exisiting
scholarship has critiqued postfeminism’s detrimental effects on gender equality, I explore its extension
into environmental politics, where it reframes activism as consumer-friendly and brand-oriented.
Focusing on Vogue’s construction of a ‘climate warrior’ network, I trace how the Indigenous identities
of young activists like Xiye Bastida and Quannah Chasinghorse are appropriated by white celebrities—
Stella McCartney, Livia Firth, and Billie Eilish—to market sustainable fashion and reinforce ethical
consumer identities. Although postfeminism often gestures toward intersectionality, its emphasis on
non-confrontation and optimism reinforces hegemonic (white, heteronormative) norms while
marginalising radical or alternative voices. Within this framework, Indigenous activists are invited to lend
authenticity to the sustainability efforts of (often nepotistic) celebrity figures, who remain central in
shaping the narrative. I argue that postfeminism now functions as a broader depoliticising force beyond
gender, neutralising the political potential of environmental activism. By commodifying both the climate
crisis and the figures associated with it, Vogue—and by extension, the fashion industry—translates
collective ecological urgency into personal lifestyle choices. Ultimately, postfeminist rhetoric enables
the fashion industry to reconcile ethical consumption with capitalist imperatives, promoting sustainability
not through systemic critique, but through the aspirational imagery of empowered individuals making
"better" choices and excluding the knowledge of Indigenous groups.


Serving and Resisting Beauty Duty: Negotiating Beauty and Gender in Intimate and Family
Relationships in China
Shuang Qiu
(Keele University)
Beauty has become a central site where gender, identity, and power are negotiated within intimate and
family life. Feminist scholarship has often framed beauty either as a tool of patriarchal control or as a
                                                   94
                       British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                        University of Manchester
                                                                                    Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                          Paper Session 3
                                                                                              15:30-17:00
means of individual empowerment, but such binary perspectives overlook how beauty is practiced and
negotiated in the context of everyday relationships. In post-socialist China, the expansion of market-
driven consumerism and the circulation of global beauty ideals have reinforced standards such as being
'pale, young, and slim'. At the same time, enduring Confucian expectations around moral femininity
continue to position women as virtuous wives and good mothers.
This article draws on in-depth interviews with 13 urban married women in Beijing to examine how beauty
is negotiated within intimate and familial relationships. Rather than understanding beauty as simply
oppressive or liberating, the study conceptualises it as a dynamic, embodied practice shaped by social
expectations, life course transitions, shifting power relations, and familial obligations. Participants
variously engaged in, complied with, or resisted what has been termed “serving beauty duty” (服美役).
The study contributes to feminist sociology by foregrounding beauty as a lived negotiation, entangled
with identity, recognition, and power in contemporary Chinese family life.


Reframing Solidarity and Global Feminism in Poland
Peggy Watson
(University of Cambridge)
Anna Walentynowicz was a welder and overhead crane driver who worked in the Gdańsk shipyard and
came to the world’s attention due to her high profile in the Solidarity protests. Despite efforts to airbrush
her from history, Walentynowicz remained a symbol of dissent with respect to the path Solidarity had
taken, the Round Table negotiations that paved the way to system change, and the social realities of
post-socialism that ensued. Thirty-five years later the world is witnessing profound geopolitical,
economic and financial transformations and there has been a backlash against liberal feminism
worldwide. This paper unsilences Anna Walentynowicz by drawing on earlier interviews and archival
material that has become available over time. This is the starting point for retelling the story of Solidarity,
and how that story functioned as a as a foundational narrative for dominant liberal feminism in Poland.
The reframing will contribute to current debates over ways forward for post-socialist feminism.


Recounting the Census: Feminist Participatory Methods for Reimagining Gender Statistics in
the United Kingdom
Sophia Hamilton, Sophia Hamilton, Minna Cowper-Coles, Liz Hind, Caitlin Schmid
(King's College London)
Persistent gender data gaps limit the UK’s ability to identify and address structural inequalities between
women and men. While the UK censuses provide comprehensive disaggregated data, it also omits
critical dimensions of gendered life, including income, unpaid childcare, and the diversity of feminised
industries. This paper used feminist participatory action research to examine the strengths and
limitations of the census for feminist and intersectional analysis. It involved 170 participants across 12
workshops in England, Wales, Scotland, and Northern Ireland from local government, women’s and
grassroots organisations, and academia, as well as unaffiliated individuals and private sector
employees, all with varying statistical skills. Through co-produced inquiry, participants identified not only
critical gender data gaps but also limitations in the political and epistemological assumptions embedded
in census design. In light of a growing crisis of trust in official statistics, we argue that feminist
participatory methods offer a way to reorient official statistics toward greater inclusivity, accountability,
and relevance. Such approaches can help rebuild confidence not only in data itself but also in the policy
derived from them. The paper concludes by outlining eight user-informed recommendations for
improving gender data and advancing gender equality in UK policymaking.




                                                    95
                        British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                         University of Manchester
                                                                                  Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                        Paper Session 3
                                                                                            15:30-17:00

Social Divisions / Social Identities 3 - Room 1.219
Deconversion: Subjectivity, Ideology, Structure, and the Power of Classification
Efstathios Kessareas
(University of Erfurt)
This paper explores religious disaffiliation or deconversion as a complex, multilayered, and socially
embedded process. Moving beyond individualized psychological accounts, it adopts an interdisciplinary
and critical sociological perspective that situates personal transformations within broader ideological
and structural shifts of late modernity.
Through a critical review of the relevant literature and recent empirical data, the paper first clarifies the
contested terminology used to describe the dropping or changing of religious attachments, highlighting
the need for more precise conceptual tools. It then maps the diverse trajectories through which
individuals disengage from religious traditions – trajectories shaped by an interplay of cognitive,
emotional, social, and practical factors. These pathways are deeply intertwined with wider societal
transformations such as the rise of individualism, secularization, pluralism, globalization, digitalization,
and migration.
Drawing on empirical material from the field of Orthodox Christianity, the paper proposes an ideal-
typical framework to classify institutional responses of religious authorities to the phenomenon of
disaffiliation. These responses range from defensive-conservative to dialogical-progressive, reflecting
broader tensions within religious fields over the role and relevance of religion in contemporary society.
Finally, the paper critically examines the role of the social sciences in constructing classificatory
schemes that shape societal understandings of non-religion and religious change. It calls for further
investigation into the mutual influence between individualized religiosity and parallel epistemological
shifts within the social sciences themselves, particularly the growing focus on individual reflexivity,
identity, and agency.


Roots of New Religiosity: From a Search in Secret India, through Sheilaism to Saint Culture
Suzanne Newcombe
(Open University and Inform)

Recent years have seen yoga milieus increasing implicated in ‘conspirituality’ – signifying an overlap
between health and wellness culture and promoting conspiracy theories. Soon after this term was
applied by Ward and Voas (2011), Asprem and Dyrendal (2015) argued that there was nothing new
about the confluence of esoteric religiosity and conspiracy theories. This paper will explore the history
of a subcultural episteme that emphasises personal experience and synthetic knowledge creation as
significant building blocks to ‘true’ knowledge. It will use figure of Paul Brunton as a case study, in order
to explore historical and cultural dynamics ‘at the intersection of religion, politics, and knowledge’. A
mercurial figure, Brunton’s influence on modern yoga has been profound. Although predominately
promoting a ‘progressive millennialist’ vision of positive evolution towards the ‘Kingdom of God’ both
internally and externally, Brunton’s milieu also encompassed a darker side. It was also included aspects
of spiritual warfare and narrowly averted World War III during the 1960s. This paper will aim to
demonstrate that Brunton’s influential writings can be seen as a precursor and possible influence to
both ‘Sheilaism’ – the New Age individualistic ‘private faith’ of Sheila Larson as described by Robert
Bellah in 1985 – as well as the more sinister logic found in contemporary online conspiracy theory and
‘Saint Culture’ where individuals create an bespoke belief system that can justify violence as an
acceptable action for perceived grievances.




                                                     96
                         British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                          University of Manchester
                                                                                Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                      Paper Session 3
                                                                                          15:30-17:00
Decoding Sacralisation: Why Interdisciplinary, Qualitative Methods Are Essential for
Understanding Christian Nationalist Discourse Institutionalisation
Kristi Boone
(University of Leeds)
This paper addresses a critical methodological challenge in sociology of religion: detecting how religious
nationalist discourse becomes systematically embedded in governance structures requires
interdisciplinary and qualitative approaches that can decode subtle obfuscation tactics. Whilst existing
research has productively examined Christian nationalism through various lenses, the specific
mechanisms through which theological assumptions transform into institutional policy frameworks
remain inadequately theorised.
Combining Wodak's discourse-historical approach (2015, 2021) with critical religion scholarship
(McCutcheon 2001; Lincoln 2003; Asad 2003), this research develops a Three-Dimensional
Sacralisation Framework for tracking coded language evolution across institutional contexts. Qualitative
discourse analysis reveals patterns that quantitative methods cannot detect: how defensive sacred
language ('defend religious liberty') evolves into offensive mandates ('religious liberty under attack'),
ultimately becoming bureaucratic directives ('religious liberty requires' specific policy interventions).
Analysis of organisational and institutional documents such as Republican Party platforms (2012-2024),
federal and state legislation, and policy documents such as Project 2025 demonstrates systematic
linguistic shifts exemplifying Wodak's 'shameless normalisation'—whereby extremist content enters
mainstream governance through strategic reframing. An interdisciplinary framework makes visible how
sacred boundaries become administrative categories, religious authority claims transform into
bureaucratic legitimation, and theological warfare embeds itself in policy implementation.
Perry (2024) documents only 46% public awareness of Christian nationalism despite its significant
policy influence, underscoring sociology's urgent need for methods capable of decoding how ideology
operates through seemingly benign communication. This research demonstrates why interdisciplinary
qualitative approaches are essential for analysing contemporary political transformations where
religious nationalism reshapes institutional structures through coded discourse that standard
methodological approaches cannot detect.


Nonversion in Context: Muslim Deconversion beyond Secularism
Metin Koca
(University of York)
This article examines the emergence of nonreligious subjectivities in Türkiye, focusing on the contours
and complexities of young individuals’ disaffiliation from Islam within a context shaped by state-led
Islamisation and contested secularist legacies. Building on recent scholarship that conceptualises
nonreligion as an emergent, affective, and biographically negotiated orientation, the article moves
beyond the secularism/Islamism binary to contextualise nonversion—the turn from inherited religion—
within a Muslim-majority setting. While frameworks developed in (post)Christian and religiously
pluralistic environments have yielded valuable insights, the article argues that Muslim-majority contexts
introduce additional political, cultural, and affective dimensions that warrant closer attention.
Accordingly, within Türkiye’s hegemonic Islamist imaginaries, nonreligion is manageable if not
desirable—but nonversion is disruptive. Identifying several research objectives in this context—notably
(1) distinguishing gradual disaffiliation from abrupt biographical rupture; (2) exploring how nonversion
interacts with enduring cultural residues; and (3) examining how nonreligious subjectivities form in
constrained analog and digital spaces, the article concludes by proposing a multidimensional
methodological framework—combining digital ethnography, interviews, and conversational journals—
to study nonreligion as a lived and structurally constrained phenomenon shaped by the political and
theological specificities of Islamist governance and Türkiye’s contested secularism.




                                                    97
                        British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                         University of Manchester
                                                                                 Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                       Paper Session 3
                                                                                           15:30-17:00

Sociology of Education 1 - Room 2.220
Reading Socialization in Childhood and Socio-economic Differences:                             Evaluating
Dispositionalist and Rational Actor Frameworks Using Contrasting Hypotheses
Andreas Roaldsnes
(University of Bergen)
Children’s reading abilities and interest shapes educational outcomes and social destinies, and the
likelihood of being a reader is subject to cultural transmission across generations. Social scientists
agree that variation is tied to differences of socialization processes in childhood, but there is less
agreement on why socio-economic differences affect reading socialization, and at what stage in
childhood this influence is the strongest. Moreover, the key differing theoretical frameworks in cultural
transmission studies, Family investment and stress theory and dispositionalist theories rarely appear in
the same studies, which is an impediment to cumulative social science. This study applies theoretical
and empirical models derived from Rational action theory and the dispositionalist framework to explain
differences in children’s reading using Norwegian survey data of reading practices in families (N=11573,
children aged 3-17 years old). By creating and testing framework-distinct hypotheses, the study
evaluates the explanatory utility of the two frameworks. Even as the study finds both useful, the
dispositional framework provides better models. The largest influence stems from specific sub-species
of cultural capital. There is no evidence that economic capital influences reading practices, which goes
against all expectations of Family Stress and Investment theory. The first hypotheses are analyzed by
way of standard causal methods. Second, using Multiple Correspondance Analysis, the study
challenges a central assumption in Rational Action Theory, the openness of reading as a cultural
practice and finds weak reading practices to be strongly related to different types of relative wont, while
strong reading practices are linked to symbolic abundance.


White Working Class 'Victim' Narratives: A Sign of Hegemonic Crisis in Education
Ian McGimpsey, Karl Kitching
(University of Birmingham)
The recently announced White Working-Class Educational Outcomes inquiry, commissioned by Star
Academies, follows two similarly focused parliamentary Education Committee inquiries in 2021 and
2014. As discussed by Gillborn (2024), public concern with the white working class since the late 2000s
has increasingly focused on white victimhood.
Our empirical focus in this paper is on policy and media coverage of the announcement of the White
Working-Class Educational Outcomes inquiry. We find that this commentary presents prioritising the
‘left behind’ White working-class as indexical of the success and even legitimacy of education policy
and practice, and ties responding to this group to other contested policy areas including equalities,
immigration, and employment. We argue that this embedding of frames, narratives and interconnected
signifiers in the representation of White working class pupils is highly politicised, and connected to the
radical Right’s mobilisation of support among ‘white school leavers’ (Ford, 2020, p. 304) with few
qualifications living in more ethnically homogenous former industrial towns and rural areas.
We argue that the widespread use of the figure of the White working-class pupil to articulate the purpose
and value of education follows a period in which the market performed a similar role for ostensibly
centrist politics as part of a neoliberal ‘global hegemonic hypernarrative’ (Clarke, 2014). We conclude
that this rupturing of the relative ideological closure of neoliberalism may indicate a ‘hegemonic crisis’
(Hall, 2013) in education connected to the broader crisis of political hegemony associated with the rise
of the radical Right across the West.




                                                     98
                         British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                          University of Manchester
                                                                                 Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                       Paper Session 3
                                                                                           15:30-17:00
Parental Activism in Education
Nathan Fretwell
(University of Leeds)
Parental activism has emerged as a prominent albeit polarising and contentious feature of the ‘culture
wars’ being waged around education in countries like the UK and USA. Set against a wave of
conservative reaction that has seen parent groups challenge the inclusion of transgender rights, LGBT+
issues, and antiracism within school curricula (Pappano, 2024), this paper seeks to reclaim the
progressive democratic potential of parental activism as a form of collective parental involvement in
education. Drawing on qualitative data collected from parent-led campaigns engaged in struggles over
a range of progressive educational issues, the paper argues that parental activism belies the
individualism inherent in traditional conceptions of parental involvement and constitutes an important
means for exercising voice in educational contexts that many parents experience as disempowering. I
capture the energy, effort and commitment displayed by parents fighting for educational justice, detail
how their actions were guided by care not only for the interests of their own children, but for wider
educational communities, and outline how they framed educational activism as a vehicle for
demonstrating to their children, and others, the importance of civic engagement. I conclude by arguing
that we need to widen the horizons of parental involvement to accommodate parents’ pursuit of
collective interests. In so doing, we might better recognise and value the democratic potential of parental
activism in education.



Sociology of Education 2 - Room 3.204
Time, Crisis, and Inclusion: SEND, Social Justice, and the Neoliberal Greek Classroom
Eleni Vagia
(University of Bristol)
This paper investigates how primary school teachers in Greece perceive and experience the inclusion
and social participation of students with special educational needs and disabilities (SEND) in the context
of austerity and neoliberal reform. The central research question guiding the study is: How do teachers
understand and negotiate the inclusion of students with SEND within conditions of resource scarcity,
intensified surveillance, and heightened standardisation? By situating teachers’ perspectives in the
aftermath of Greece’s financial crisis, the paper highlights how historical legacies of austerity continue
to shape present possibilities for inclusion.
The study draws on six semi-structured interviews with teachers in two mainstream schools. Thematic
analysis reveals both strong commitment to inclusive ideals and deep concerns about limited capacity
to meet diverse needs. Teachers emphasised four interrelated dimensions of social participation—peer
acceptance, friendship formation, self-perception, and interaction—as vital to fostering belonging and
emotional well-being. These accounts underscore the temporal nature of inclusion: not a one-off
placement, but an unfolding process of building relationships, challenging hierarchies, and sustaining
democratic practices over time.
The findings reveal tensions between neoliberal logics of commodification and schools’ democratic
potential. Grounded in critical pedagogy, the paper argues for reimagining inclusion as a counter-
hegemonic practice that resists individualisation and market-driven priorities. Teachers emerge as
agents of change whose struggles illuminate wider sociological questions about how education systems
inherit crises, reproduce inequalities, and open possibilities for solidarity and emancipation.


Why is No One Talking about Disability? An Exploration of the Disabling Barriers Experienced
by Dyslexic Pupils in Selective Local Educational Authorities (LEAs) in England
Esther Outram
(Durham University)

There is a stark underrepresentation of special educational needs pupils in grammar schools, yet the
broader academic conversation and critique of whether educational selection at age 11 is fair and
                                                      99
                          British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                           University of Manchester
                                                                                 Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                       Paper Session 3
                                                                                           15:30-17:00
meritocratic has predominately remained firmly within the parameters of social class, largely ignoring
disability. This ESRC funded research includes dyslexic lived experiences in the conversation of social
justice and the existence of grammar schools to present findings from biographic interviews with
dyslexic pupils (n=41)(aged 14-17) and interviews with Special Educational Needs Co-ordinators (n=6)
from schools across selective educational authorities (LEAs)(n=7) in England. Theoretically drawing on
Doreen Massey’s relational time-space and Carol Thomas’ socio-relational model of disability, this
paper explores the disabling psycho-emotional barriers experienced by dyslexic pupils in selective
LEAs. This paper finds temporal tensions of academic selection aged 11 and low rates of dyslexia
identification during primary school, shapes the educational spaces dyslexic pupils occupy and their
perceived belonging in high attainment spaces. Affective atmospheres of urgency embedded within
high attainment spaces and the dominance of standardised high-stakes testing reproduces neurotypical
constructions of ‘intelligence’ and ‘time’ in grammar schools. The guise of neurotypical meritocracy
legitimises which academic pathways pupils perceive as inclusive and offering an equal opportunity for
'success’. Thus, such selective schooling systems damage pupils’ academic self-concepts whilst
reinforcing medicalised deficit understandings of which spaces dyslexic pupils can occupy. Finally, as
a dyslexic insider, this paper hopes to contribute dyslexic voices to a broader discussion of authentic
inclusion of dyslexic individuals within all educational spaces, including ‘high’ attainment.


‘Of course, academia is not a cult. Cults offer a sense of belonging’: Towards the Inclusion of
Disabled Academics: A Class-based Analysis
Alison Wilde, Rebecca Fish
(Northumbria University)
In response to the conference’s question ‘What are sociologists paying attention to now?’ we assert the
need to give far more consideration to disability and impairments in the production of sociological
knowledge, and to attend to the much-neglected matter of how disabled sociologists can be recognised
and embraced by the sociological community. We narrow these questions to a focus on the recruitment
of disabled academics for academic jobs in the social sciences.
This paper is based on deeper and selective analysis of recruitment data gained our recent study of
disabled academics and class in Higher Education Institutions. Following the wider aims of the project,
which foregrounded the distinct gaps on precarity, class, and disability in the literature on disability and
Higher Education, our paper argues that there is an urgent need for academia to understand and
change the processes and norms which keep disabled academics on the margins of academia, or out
of it, not least in understanding the impacts marginalisation has on disabled academics’ lives, but also
on the perpetuation of limited epistemologies in research and teaching.
We focus our analysis on the experiences of those working in EDI, HR, and recruitment staff, with
disabled candidates, triangulating both streams of data with documentary analysis of job descriptions
and other relevant policies. Thus, we present a multi-dimensional view of how the academic workforce
culture reproduces or challenges its ethnocentric biases, normative practices, and hierarchies of cultural
capital, and how it could change to optimise the inclusion of disabled academics.



Theory - Room 4.205
Can't Even Imagine: The Foundations of Imaginative Justice
Birgan Gokmenoglu, Joe Davidson
(Birmingham City University)
This paper explores the notion of imaginative justice by unpacking the factors that enable or constrain
the imagination. We take the imagination as a form of bricolation that takes familiar elements of the
world as we know it and rearranges them in new and creative ways. To theorise the foundations of
imaginative justice we focus on the social and political constrictions, which are malleable and variable,
that restrict this bricolating activity. Using a range of theories and case studies, we seek to understand
the power relations that influence dominant and marginalised imaginaries, both at the individual and
collective level. The two cases we examine as illustrations of dominant and marginalised imaginaries
are Silicon imaginaries, where the Silicon Valley's visions of the future that track dominant relations of
                                                       100
                          British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                            University of Manchester
                                                                                 Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                       Paper Session 3
                                                                                           15:30-17:00
power are affirmed, and protest imaginaries which break with established relations of power and are
thus marginalised. In a world in which alternatives are deemed unimaginable, studying the uneven
distribution of imagination across social groups gives us insights into who shapes our collective futures
and how these futures can be reclaimed.


The Advanced Taste: Bourdieu, Temporality and Global Inequalities
Yuhan Jiang
(University of Edinburgh)
This presentation examines global inequality through the lens of cultural taste, focusing on how
hierarchies of cultural consumption in the Global South are often explained in temporal terms: cultural
forms are categorised as either advanced or lagging behind. Such temporal hierarchies are particularly
evident in the labelling of “Western” culture, which is frequently associated with science and modernity
during its localisation, in contrast to local forms positioned as outdated.
I illustrate this through a study of jazz in China, based on ten months of fieldwork in Shanghai and 56
interviews. Jazz was first introduced in the 1920s by colonial intermediaries, gained popularity in the
1930s–40s, was later banned during the Cold War, and re-emerged in the 1980s. Today, jazz remains
a niche genre, embraced primarily by professional musicians who frame it as a marker of scientific
modernity for advancing music education and production. In this context, jazz is less emphasised as an
African American cultural form than as superior musical knowledge. Musicians frequently expressed a
desire to “catch up” with the United States, positioning jazz as a sign of progress in the musical field.
I argue that this case reveals how cultural capital in global hierarchies is often embedded in discourses
of temporality, where the Global South is constructed as perpetually lagging. Drawing on Bourdieu’s
field theory and postcolonial critiques, this presentation unpacks the role of temporality in cultural
globalisation, contributing to current debates on decolonisation and the persistence of global cultural
inequalities.


Assembling Bodies and Technologies in Relational Dialogues with Children and Young People
around AI Futures
Debbie Watson, Lisa May Thomas
(University of Bristol)
Artificial intelligence (AI) systems are increasingly woven into the everyday lives of children and young
people (CYP), yet the datafication processes and agendas underpinning these technologies remain
largely opaque. While studies highlight that AI and digital literacy education can shape CYP’s
perceptions of AI, their expectations are also shaped by diverse social, economic, and cultural contexts.
As data are always and variously connected to our bodies, as ‘human-data assemblages’ (Lupton,
2018), we think that it is urgent and critical to understand what CYP think and feel about their data and
its use in AI systems, and how they imagine the futures of these technologies in their lives. In this paper,
we report on a collaborative study with CYP investigating these ideas, using the technologies
themselves as methods for imagining and enacting different sociodigital entanglements and futures. In
doing so, we position/considered the CYP as posthuman subjects intra-acting (Barad, 2007) with
technologies in embodied and embedded ways (Braidotti, 2013). By foregrounding the everyday
practices, material realities, and embodied experiences of CYP, and by grounding our practice in
situated, relational, material ways, we hoped to bring ‘depth and detailedness’ (Feitsma and Whitehead,
2025) to their ‘futures in the making’ (Halford and Southerton, 2023).




                                                      101
                          British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                           University of Manchester
                                                                                   Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                         Paper Session 3
                                                                                             15:30-17:00

Work, Employment & Economic Life -
Room 3.212
Walking in the Office with My Head Held High: Tales of Gains from Lifelong Learning
Mary Shek, Fran Myers, Sarah Bloomfield, Kulvinder Buray, Alice Winters
(Open University)
Whilst current UK government skills offerings were initially focused on options for young people, lifelong
learning policies are now emerging through a framework of individuals learning ‘at a time that is right
for them’ (Gov.uk, 2025). However, whilst there is a rich literature on traditional student development,
less is known about the benefits that ‘upskilling’ brings to learners already situated in the workplace.
This paper shines a light on how individuals gain from embarking on and completing formal study
programmes via lifelong learning.
We focus in on five discrete learners, hearing their voices from a set of 33 interviews with employed
individuals studying for their degree in mid/later working life. Vignettes enable participants to tell their
own stories, in our case highlighting initial feelings of failure carried over from school to emotions around
impostor syndrome at work.
Through these rich ‘journey’ narratives we learn how their working lives and self-perceptions change
through completing their degree apprenticeships as mature learners. We note how individuals learn to
walk taller, and gain recognition and status around new skills and accompanying theoretical knowledge.
Findings not only highlight individual benefit but also gains for their employers and society more widely.
At a time of policy flux and economic uncertainty, empirical research in this area will provide vital insights
into future directions for workforce planning and development.
Reference: Gov.uk (2025) Lifelong learning entitlement: what it is and how it will work - GOV.UK
(accessed 11/08/25)


Searching for a Meaningful Life? How Young People Navigate Precarity and Insecurity in
England
Kaidong Yu, Edward Yates, Jason Heyes
(University of Sheffield)
This paper examines how young people experience and navigate insecurity and precarity through an
exploration of their working conditions and wider life experiences. Young workers are vulnerable to the
widespread ‘normalised’ precarious work as they are more likely to lack the developed skills, capital,
and capacities which older workers possess. While work is often lauded as a solution to the problems
facing young people as it can provide meaning, belonging, purpose, and dignity, little is known about
how young people engage with work and employment in order to find a sense of meaning, and in doing
so develop dignity and self-worth in the context of precarious employment.
The study draws on interview data with 70 young non-graduates in England from the ESRC-funded
project ‘Transitions of Young Workers in the UK Labour Market: Consequences for Careers, Earnings,
Health and Wellbeing’. Our findings illustrate the complex ways in which young people navigate
precarity. Three alternative narratives against precarity were identified: downplaying the importance of
pay, prioritising enjoyment and work-life balance, and maintaining modest, value-driven hopes for the
future. Our findings illustrate that young people assert agency in precarious conditions through rejection
of status markets and the sense of meaning which can come from traditionally high-status work. We
argue that such narratives to counter structural precarity are significant for understanding how young
workers' experiences of insecurity are differentiated and stratified. The paper therefore offers new
insights into how precarity and insecurity are experienced, felt, and, crucially, resisted.




                                                    102
                        British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                         University of Manchester
                                                                                  Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                        Paper Session 3
                                                                                            15:30-17:00
Digitalization Reshaping Job Autonomy? New Evidence from a German Employment Survey
2024
Gina Glock
(Technical University of Berlin)
Background: In light of increasing digitalization, this article examines the relation between the use of
digital technologies in the workplace and employees' subjective perception of job autonomy.
Relevance: Job autonomy is considered a key work resource that allows employees to meet work
demands and shows positive links to productivity, satisfaction, or creativity.
Methods: Based on the BIBB/BAuA employment surveys of 2012, 2018, and 2024, the use and
introduction of digital technologies are considered indicators of workplace digitalization. Job autonomy
is measured using a composite index and four sub-dimensions (Task, Criteria, Scheduling, Working
Time). Multiple linear regression analyses are used to estimate the effects of digital tools on the
Autonomy Index.
Results: The regression analyses show that digital technologies are linked to job autonomy in various
ways: video conferencing enhances all areas of autonomy, while frequent computer use increases task-
related freedom but limits flexibility in terms of work goals and time. Smartphones promote task- and
method-associated autonomy but are associated with a loss of control over goals and working hours.
Greater autonomy is positively linked to the perceived relief brought about by the introduction of new
technologies. These results thus fit into existing research on the ambivalent relationship between
digitalization and working conditions.
Practical relevance: This article offers a nuanced view of the connection between job autonomy and the
use of selected digital tools, providing valuable insights for companies and policymakers to develop
strategies for creating humane working conditions in an increasingly digitized and intensified world of
work.


Constructing the "Ideal" Graduate: Employer Narratives in a Post-Covid World
Sviatlana Kroitar, Elizabeth Robinson
(University of Leicester)
The Covid-19 pandemic has drastically restructured the UK labour market, intensifying graduate
competition and potentially widening existing skills gaps. This paper presents preliminary findings from
a mixed-methods study investigating how employer expectations for essential graduate skills have
evolved in this new post-pandemic world, specifically focusing on the challenges employers face in
navigating these shifts.
We adopt an integrated theoretical framework, using labour process theory to view the pandemic as a
catalyst for employers to strategically reshape skill demands to ensure productivity and control in
fragmented work environments. Simultaneously, institutional theory helps us understand how these
strategies are embedded in, and shaped by, evolving social norms, industry-specific standards, and
cultural expectations about what constitutes a "good" employee in a post-Covid context.
The project uses a strategic, synergistic sequential mixed-methods design. We began with a broad
national quantitative survey of 400 employers across England to establish a statistical foundation of
demands, followed by in-depth qualitative interviews with 15-20 employers in London. This combination
of national breadth and regional depth is designed to reveal not just what skills are valued, but critically,
why.
Currently in the data collection stage, this paper shares the initial findings from the quantitative survey
data. These results identify key trends in skill priorities and perceptions of graduate preparedness
across various sectors, providing a robust framework to understand the most significant shifts in
employer expectations since the pandemic.




                                                    103
                        British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                         University of Manchester
                            STREAM PLENARIES
                                17:15-18:15




                                           Session Table of Contents
Environment & Society - Room 4.206 ............................................................................................. 105
Families & Relationships - Room 4.204 .......................................................................................... 105
Race, Ethnicity & Migration - Lecture Theatre A ............................................................................. 105

Rights, Violence & Crime - Room 4.205.......................................................................................... 106
Science, Technology & Digital Studies - Room 2.218..................................................................... 107
Social Divisions / Social Identities - Room 1.218 ............................................................................ 107

Sociology of Education - Room 3.205 (Special Event) ................................................................... 108
Work, Employment & Economic Life - Room 1.219 ........................................................................ 109




                                                      104
                          British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                           University of Manchester
                                                                                    Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                         Stream Plenaries
                                                                                              17:15-18:15

Environment & Society - Room 4.206
Borrowed Time: Developing Multi-Temporal Imaginations
Ben Highmore
(University of Sussex)
Industrial modernity was fashioned out of a time before humans were born, a time when the planet’s
provision of coal, oil, and gas was being formed (see Malm 2016, Szeman 2019). Today the fossil fuels
that were combusted to forge the industrial expansions of Britain, Europe, America and their colonies
are still acting on our planet. We are living in the unfinished business of the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries, business that was built on the borrowed time of the energy storage that went into producing
fossil fuels. If we simply stopped burning fossil fuels today the seas and the atmosphere would continue
to heat up. This means that we are living in non-synchronous temporalities: a recent history that was
reliant on millions of years of organic transformation; and a future history of the past unfolding in
predictable and unpredictable ways. This is the long longue durée of geological time, and the future
perfect (or future anterior) – the ‘what will have been’ – of global warming. These complex conjugations
of time are not scholarly pedantry but crucial to trying to understand our present conjuncture as a time
of competing catastrophes. As we witness the rise of the far right with its attendant white suprematism,
deep misogyny, and dedication to misinformation, we also await levels of climate migration that will
make our current refugee crisis seem minor. There is of course no easy solution here, but any response
to this situation will require multi-temporal imaginations.

Chair: Pancho Lewis



Families & Relationships - Room 4.204
Queer Lineage: On Generational Sexualities LGBTQ Identity and Visibility
Róisín Ryan-Flood
(University of Essex)
This paper proposes a new concept, ‘queer lineage’, which refers to intergenerational queer
interpersonal connections that look to the past in ways that are significant in the present. It draws on
Ken Plummer’s theory of generational sexualities, to incorporate an intersectional approach to the
generational narratives of sexualities that co-exist in the same present moment. Exploring
contemporary representations of elder LGBTQ lives in visual culture and their popularity with younger
audiences, it is argued that cross-generational connections can be foundational to queer community
and often exist alongside intergenerational dialogue and positive relationality. The paper also presents
some reflections on changes in theorising queer kinship over time.
Chair: Shuang Qiu



Race, Ethnicity & Migration -
Lecture Theatre A
The Enforced Silence: Gaza and Scholasticide of Palestinian Academics: Parallels,
Provocations, and Pathways for Action
Syra Shakir, Anna Liddle, Penny Rabiger, Fadoua Govaerts
(Leeds Trinity University, Sheffield Hallam University, Leeds Beckett University, University of Bath)
In times of crisis, silence is never neutral; it is complicit. This article interrogates the concept of
scholasticide, first coined by Nabulsi and further developed by Hajir and Qato (2025) as both a
humanitarian and epistemic crisis. Scholasticide captures the systematic destruction of Palestinian
universities, scholars, and intellectual life, exposing education as a key target of settler colonial violence.

                                                     105
                         British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                          University of Manchester
                                                                              Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                   Stream Plenaries
                                                                                        17:15-18:15
Yet, we argue that scholasticide also illuminates broader global patterns of academic suppression,
including censorship, retaliation, and the dismantling of equity and critical pedagogical initiatives.
Drawing on examples from Palestine, the United States, and the United Kingdom, the plenary situates
the silencing of educators and students within wider nationalist and neoliberal co-optations of the
academy.
The analysis engages three interrelated questions: how scholasticide reveals mechanisms of
suppression in global academia; what ethical and political responsibilities scholars, universities, and
academic organisations bear in resisting complicity; and what strategies can break enforced silence
and foster spaces of resistance. Mobilising critical pedagogy (Freire, 2020; hooks, 2014; Giroux, 2022),
we contend that education is not a neutral endeavour but a practice of freedom requiring moral clarity.
Historical precedents, from anti-apartheid academic boycotts to anti-war student movements, illustrate
pathways for collective resistance, while contemporary examples highlight the urgent need to protect
endangered scholars and centre marginalised voices. We conclude with a call to action: for educators,
students, and institutions to move beyond performative solidarity, confront systemic injustice, and
reclaim academic freedom as a space of resistance. Breaking the silence is a pedagogical imperative
and ethical duty.
Chair: Doğuş Şimşek and Oluchi Mellor



Rights, Violence & Crime - Room 4.205
Feminist Worldmaking in Turbulent Times: Holding out Hope and Forging Connections
Miranda Horvath, Yemisi Sloane, Kim Heyes, Shoba Arun
(University of Suffolk, Anglia Ruskin University, Manchester Metropolitan University, University of
Essex)
What does it mean to be a feminist researcher working towards a world without violence against women
and girls (VAWG) in 2026? This session explores contemporary conflicts, crises and complexities
VAWG researchers find ourselves reckoning with, and strategies for holding onto hope, safeguarding
wellbeing and building community.
The UK government has pledged to halve VAWG within the next decade, yet gender-based violence
remains a fiercely contested terrain. VAWG is becoming increasingly instrumentalised by reactionary
political movements in the UK and internationally, even as institutional responses and investment
continue to fall far short of societal need.
Session convenors invite speakers to consider their work in context, encouraging reflexive engagement
with the evolving status of VAWG research(ers), nationally and globally, in this divided and hostile
climate.
Speakers would situate their research journeys in space and time, reflecting on what has changed,
whose voices remain dominant, or side-lined, and how they are working to promote community and
wellbeing among VAWG researchers globally. Speakers would explore how feminist worldmaking
practices can be employed to contest oppression, forge connections and build fairer futures across
diverse contexts.
Speakers are invited to reflect on relevant topics including:
    researcher wellbeing and trauma-informed research
    community-led world-building and expressions of solidarity among difference
    resisting conceptual and epistemic entanglements of VAWG with coloniality and racial
       hierarchies
    lived experience
    intersectionality
    co-production, creative and participatory methodologies
    navigating tensions and conflicts within VAWG research spaces
    engaging in research that matters/disrupts/provokes in neoliberal environments

                                                   106
                       British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                        University of Manchester
                                                                                Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                     Stream Plenaries
                                                                                          17:15-18:15
       imaginaries of and pathways to VAWG-free future
Chair: Katherine Allen, Mirna Guha, Kim Heyes



Science, Technology & Digital Studies -
Room 2.218
The Special Relationship between Sociology and Science, Technology and Innovation Studies
Robin Williams
(University of Edinburgh)
Science and Technology Studies (STS) has emerged in close engagement with theories and
methodologies from Sociology (and related work from Anthropology and History). However, the
epistemic orientations of these fields diverge in important ways.
STS has been able to secure attention and voice through its ability to colonise new territories thrown
up by technoscientific change - in the process securing funding and policy/stakeholder relevance. It has
tackled these by developing generic conceptual frameworks that can readily be applied to almost any
context (translation; interessement; boundary object) while cautioning against “theory in the form of
grand narrative” (Law 2008).
At the same time, STS is characterised by significant internal heterogeneity, shaped by its multiple
engagements with other disciplines and various external audiences and by the diverse orientations of
scholarship, from theoretical contributions to practice-focused interventions. These dynamics generate
potential tensions.
Recognising and working with these complementary orientations can foster a productive synergy
between sociology and STS. Indeed in the UK context, sociology departments have housed many STS
groups. The possibilities for a mutually beneficial relationship are particularly evident where Sociology
and STS been returned together under Research Excellence Framework (REF) exercises where
sociology departments have benefitted in turn from STS research income and impact.
Convergent pressures are countered by the productive engagements between STS and sociologically
and sociomaterially oriented scholarship in cognate fields including Innovation Studies (hence the
growing STIS designation), Organization Studies, Information Systems, Design.

Chair: Yuhan Wang



Social Divisions / Social Identities - Room 1.218
A Wealth of Insight: What 75 Years of Studying Elites Can Tell Us about Social Change,
Inequality and Sociology
Mike Savage, François Schoenberger, Liz Mann
(London School of Economics and Political Science, University of Oxford, University College Cork)
C. Wright Mills’s book The Power Elite, published 70 years ago in 1956, arguably launched the
sociological study of elites as we know it. The book is widely considered both the first large-scale,
sociological study of power structures and one of the first that did not take a purely Marxist approach,
instead integrating various theoretical perspectives. However, sociological work on elites seemed to be
largely on hold through the overlapping civil rights battles of the 1960s and 1970s, which shifted the
focus of the academy to marginalised groups, and the 1980s, when the promise of neoliberalism pushed
social class concerns into the background. Although a watershed moment in the field was the arrival of
Bourdieu’s theories of elite reproduction, it was not until after the global financial crisis of 2008 that
inequalities were back in focus and the sociological study of elites rapidly gained traction. Since then,
the field has deepened and broadened its engagement with various methods, theories, objects of study,

                                                   107
                       British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                        University of Manchester
                                                                                 Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                      Stream Plenaries
                                                                                           17:15-18:15
approaches to access and ethical issues. The stream plenary will unpack this history - what it reveals
about the nature of social change and inequality, and, importantly, what it tells us about the field itself.

Chair: Emma Taylor, Sarah Kunz



Sociology of Education - Room 3.205
Special Event
Rewilding Higher Education
Gaurish Chawla
(University of Sussex)
The land we roam
The episteme we rove
Interconnected.

N.B.: Walking tour on Tues 7 April, 15:45-17:00 (details below) followed by facilitated workshop.
This facilitated workshop will aim to explore the ecological concept of rewilding as a metaphorical
inspiration for higher education. Restricting our understanding of ‘learning’ to cognitive experiences
limited to highly industrialised ‘classrooms’ is problematised: This experience is dissociated from nature,
sterile and disconnected and inspires knowledge that struggles to not conform to a similar description.
Rewilding is a response, both environmentally and epistemologically, to the observation that “overly
managed systems, whether ecological or educational, can become depleted, homogenous and fragile
(Gillies & Compton, 2025).” A call for a Rewilding of Higher Education recognises the role a “command
and control (ibid.)” academic culture, rooted in a “technocratic model of education (Woods et al., 2010)”
underpinned by Tyler’s work (1949, cited in Woods et al., 2010) can and does play in creating intellectual
homogeneity, reducing plurality and thereby adversely affecting the intellectual diversity within higher
education.
In this facilitated workshop, we draw on rewilding to re-energise our conceptualisation of pedagogy:
what if higher education was less about creation of “assessments” that reinforce command and control
ideologies akin to harshly, harmfully ‘maintained’ gardens; and more about embodied experiences?
Must knowledge exchange and creation default to a setting reminiscent of industrial workhouses or
could we adopt more liberated methods such as ‘the walking seminar’ (The Walking Seminar, n.d.)?
We explore how our understanding of ‘pristine gardens’ and ‘weeds’ is intertwined with our
understanding of higher education and its exclusionary baggage. The goal of this workshop is to steer
us away from Uni-versity to Pluri-versity (Boidin et al, 2012), from a uni-species grass lawn, that may
look pristine to our eyes but hides away environmental violence; to a re-wilded garden where we all
thrive and harmonise.
The workshop will take the shape of a facilitated discussion on the following three topics followed by a
summarising plenary. The discussions will be guided by relevant content on a PowerPoint presentation.
    1. Rewilding teaching: Exploring curriculum design and delivery as well as learning experience for
       ideologically forced homogeneity and devising and studying rewilding- inspired alternatives.
    2. Rewilding knowledge creation: How could we dispense with the term Re-search and focus on
       creation of wild, emancipatory, knowledge?
    3. Rewilding higher education relationality: To explore together how higher education could rewild
       itself into a space less about ‘command, control and examine’ relationships, and more about a
       relationality of trust. A relationship that encourages celebrating our diversity and our unique
       epistemologies and translating these epistemologies into knowledge.
References (truncated for word count)
    Boidin,et al. (2012). Introduction: From University to Pluriversity: A Decolonial Approach to the
       Present Crisis of Western Universities.

                                                     108
                         British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                          University of Manchester
                                                                                    Wednesday 8 April 2026
                                                                                         Stream Plenaries
                                                                                              17:15-18:15
       Gillies, and Compton, (2025). https://www.ucl.ac.uk/political-science/events/2025/mar/prof-
        cathy-elliotts-inaugural-lecture-rewilding-university
       The Walking Seminar. https://www.ahk.nl/onderzoek/artist-in-residence-air/publicaties/the-
        walking-seminar/.
       Tyler, R. W. (1949). Basic Principles of Curriculum and Instruction.
       Woods,                      A.,                  et                  al             2010).
        https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780080448947000580
N.B. Walking Tour
Interested delegates are invited to join Gaurish for an optional Rewilding themed walk that we hope will
inspire our thoughts ahead of the session. The walk will take place as follows:
Date: Tuesday 7 April 2026
Time: 15:45-17:00 BST
Location: Castlefield viaduct
Facilitated by: Gaurish Chawla
Meeting point: just in front of the viaduct entrance.
Sign up: email Gaurish directly on gaurishc@icloud.com
Further details: National Trust owned, free to enter, Castlefield viaduct has been transformed from an
industrial revolution era viaduct to a haven for plant and wildlife so will really suit our topic. Please see
the website for details and accessibility. https://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/visit/cheshire-greater-
manchester/castlefield-viaduct



Work, Employment & Economic Life -
Room 1.219
Born to Rule, Forced to Rationalise: Elite Resilience and Precarious Exclusion
Aaron Reeves, Krzysztof Jankowski
(London School of Economics and Political Science, Independent Scholar)
Understanding Britain's elite matters because they are the gatekeepers and beneficiaries of power and
privilege—controlling the rules of work, employment, and economic life. This group often appears to be
a conservative "chumocracy," born to privilege and anointed at Eton and Oxford. But to what extent is
this caricature true, and how have recent economic shocks altered the pathways into the elite?
Drawing on a novel, definitive dataset covering the careers of over 125,000 members of the British elite
from the late 1890s to today, Aaron Reeves argues that the contemporary elite aren't exactly like the
elite of the past. Shifts in the political economy are clearly reflected in their composition. And yet, despite
these changes, there are critical continuities. The plenary focuses on the powerful mechanisms that
enable the elite to sustain itself, revealing structural resilience particularly around social origins. This
remaking of the British elite gives us crucial clues about how they will change—or resist change—in
response to the profound contemporary crises.
In contrast, Krzysztof Jankowski argues that tertiary-educated young adults in London’s low-pay,
insecure job market are excluded from the professional careers they expected. Interview data reveals
a precarious rationalisation to remain detached and hesitant toward the labour market. Crucially, their
social capital acts as a cushion, allowing them to avoid the worst conditions, yet still denying them true
financial security. The plenary offers a dual perspective for discussing elite and non-elite reproduction
and the increasing instability of social positions in the twenty-first century.
Chair: Irena Grugulis




                                                    109
                        British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                                         University of Manchester
      PUBLISHERS’ RECEPTION
               AND
      POSTER PRESENTATIONS



                 Wednesday 8 April 2026
                     18:15-19:45
                      The Drum



Please join us to tour the publisher exhibition stands and view our conference
posters. Publishers and poster authors will be available for questions and
discussion. Refreshments will be provided.




Abstracts for all posters can be found in the separate document titled ‘Poster
Presentations Abstracts’.




                               110
   British Sociological Association Annual Conference 2026
                    University of Manchester
