  Race, Ethnicity
   and Change in
Higher Education
Race, ethnicity and higher education in the UK and Ireland: Report from
a Royal Irish Academy-British Council in Ireland dialogue event


PREFACE
In January 2020 the Royal Irish Academy and the British Council in Ireland brought together
leading thinkers and practitioners for a discussion on ethnicity and race, diversity and inclusion
in higher education (HE) in Ireland and the UK.1 This paper is the product of the voices,
perspectives and data presented at the event.

It provides an overview of the key themes and issues raised including ideas for achieving greater
equality of outcome for those from Irish Traveller, Black, Asian and other ethnic minority
backgrounds in academic leadership posts within the Irish and UK higher education system.

The dialogue recognises the urgency of supporting the inclusion of researchers and academics
from all racial and ethnic backgrounds within higher education. National conversations on how to
achieve greater equality, diversity and inclusion in higher education are gaining momentum but
there are still many gaps in knowledge and understanding of the individual, systemic and
institutional barriers that must be overcome. In the absence of systematic data collection by
higher education institutions of racial and ethnicity markers for staff from Black, Asian, Irish
Traveller and other minority ethnic and migrant backgrounds, the discussion necessarily relied
heavily upon UK data for insights. Contributions from the keynote speakers, panellists and from
the invited audience of higher education stakeholders – management, staff, students, and
funders – provided insights into the lived experiences of staff and students from the above
groups. Irish HE institutions’ gender equality initiatives provided a useful context for discussions
and indeed, the need to be alert to intersectional discrimination2 emerged as a key theme.

Although Ireland and UK higher education systems are different, there are enough commonalities
and shared challenges evident in addressing race and equality to have merited bringing
speakers and guests from Ireland and the UK together in this forum. The sustained level of
mobility (student and staff) and the extensive collaboration within research and through
institutional partnerships between the UK and Ireland3 are important. Equally, shared learning
across jurisdictions is a useful tool to advance understanding.




1
  Details of the event including agenda, speaker biographies and presentations are available online at www.ria.ie and
https://www.britishcouncil.ie/
2
  This refers to discrimination that takes place on the basis of several personal grounds or characteristics/identities, which
operate and interact with each other at the same time in such a way as to be inseparable. For example, where an
individual may face disadvantages on foot of a combination of some or all of the following: gender, race, ethnicity or class.
European Institute of Gender Equality, accessed at: https://eige.europa.eu/thesaurus/terms/1262
3
  See the 2017 Royal Irish Academy report ‘Research and Higher Education on the island of Ireland post-Brexit’, and the
2016 British Council in Ireland report ‘Assessing the implication of the UK’s exit from the European Union on education
and cultural sectors in Northern Ireland and Ireland’.

                                                                                                                            11
A note on terminology: The phrase BAME (Black, Asian, Minority Ethnic) is commonly used in
the UK to refer to persons from black, Asian and minority ethnic backgrounds, and guides data
collection and reporting across the UK higher education system. In Ireland, while these
categories are relevant, the phrase itself is not so widely used in policy discussions and does not,
for example, adequately reflect and include the experiences of Irish Travellers as a specifically
Irish minority ethnic group, or those from migrant groups. For the purposes of this discussion,
the paper will use the terminology ‘Irish Traveller, Black, Asian, minority ethnic (BAME) and
migrant groups’ in an imperfect attempt to reflect the diversity of lived experiences to whom this
paper is relevant. The May 2020 statement from the National Athena SWAN Ireland
Intersectionality Working Group on the Use of Ethnicity Categories in Irish Higher Education
offers a succinct summary of the limitations and ethics of using ethnicity categories.4



Policy dialogue structure
The event was chaired by Professor Anita Maguire, MRIA, Chair, RIA Diversity Committee,
University College Cork, with keynotes by: Dr Jason Arday, Durham University; Professor
Kathleen James Chakraborthy, MRIA, University College Dublin; Dr Gemma Irvine, Maynooth
University; and Dr Gary Loke, Advance HE UK. Panellists included Dr Ebun Joseph, RCSI and
Equality consultant; Dr Ross Woods, HEA Centre for Gender Equality; Dr Michael Isichei, Queen’s
University Belfast; Professor Anastasia Crickley, Pavee Point, and Megan Reilly, Union of Students
in Ireland.

The agreed starting point was the urgent necessity of improving the experiences and outcomes
for staff from Irish Traveller, Black, Asian, minority ethnic and migrant backgrounds in the higher
education sector in the UK and Ireland. To inform this discussion, invited keynote speakers
discussed:

   •   the existing evidence base pointing to the exclusion of Irish Traveller, Black, Asian,
       migrant ethnic and migrant groups in academia

   •   insight into the lived experiences of staff and students from Irish Traveller, BAME
       and migrant backgrounds

   •   the policy background and the evolution of equality, diversity and inclusion (EDI)
       legislation and initiatives specific to higher education in Ireland and the UK

   •   actions which can be undertaken at both a personal and institutional level within
       higher education to address racism and exclusion.

Readers are encouraged to view the keynote recordings and presentations available online as
these provide the backdrop for much of the discussion presented in this paper.




                                                                                                  22
Four major themes emerged over the course of the discussion:


1. Addressing under-representation across all groups and learning from
gender equality initiatives
Discussion of EDI issues at the workshop frequently referred to the progress made, and activities
initiated by Irish and UK higher education institutions (HEIs) through their membership of the
Athena Swan Charter. Established in the UK in 2005, the Athena Swan Charter recognises the
efforts and achievements of member HEIs to advance gender equality.

There was general agreement that the focus on gender equality arising from national and
individual discussion5 and the subsequent widespread engagement by Irish HEIs with the Athena
Swan Charter for Gender Equality has led to dedicated actions to address gender under-
representation. It was equally acknowledged that much remains to be done on the issue of
gender equality including building in more nuanced responses to support those at the
intersection of multiple forms of inequality e.g. disability, exclusion by race or ethnicity, including
that experienced by Irish Travellers as well as those from black, Asian, minority ethnic or migrant
backgrounds.

While Athena Swan has achieved a significant level of name recognition and a significant degree
of institutional buy-in in addressing gender equality issues by HEIs in Ireland, issues of race and
ethnicity have yet to figure as prominently in either the Athena Swan Charter or broader EDI
initiatives in the HE sector. Similarly, in the UK, despite much greater documenting of the
inequalities experienced by staff from BAME backgrounds in academia, HEIs have been slow to
engage with initiatives such as the Advance HE Race and Equality Charter.

The Advance HE Race and Equality Charter provides a framework through which institutions
work to self-reflect on institutional and cultural barriers standing in the way of minority ethnic
staff and students.

    •    There are 152 Athena Swan Charter HEI members in Ireland and the UK.
         Institutional access to the Charter is funded through the Higher Education
         Authority.

    •    There are 62 Race and Equality Charter HEI members in the UK.6




5
  At a national level, the work of the HEA national expert group proved particularly important in raising awareness of the
extent of the challenges, see for example the June 2016 HEA National Review of Gender Equality in Irish Higher
Education Institutions, accessed at: https://hea.ie/assets/uploads/2017/06/HEA-National-Review-of-Gender-Equality-in-
Irish-Higher-Education-Institutions.pdf. At an individual level, the determination of academics such as Dr Micheline
Sheehy Skeffington in pursuing discrimination cases against their academic employer did much to initiate a national
conversation on these issues. Dr Sheehy Skeffington successfully pursued a claim through the Equality Tribunal which
found that her employer had discriminated against the academic for promotion because of her gender. See:
https://www.irishtimes.com/life-and-style/people/micheline-sheehy-skeffington-i-m-from-a-family-of-feminists-i-took-
this-case-to-honour-them-1.2027451
6
  Data from Advance HE, accessed at: https://www.ecu.ac.uk/equality-charters/athena-swan/, 20 July 2020.

                                                                                                                        33
Dialogue participants were clear on the importance of data – quantitative and qualitative – in
informing the implementation of Athena Swan relevant actions and strategies in Irish HEIs. A
strong focus on narrative data and the lived experiences of women in academia was seen as
particularly useful in helping to identify and understand what happens when institutional-level
structural barriers collide with individual life circumstances. The collection of appropriate
narrative and qualitative data would equally assist Irish HEIs seeking to better understand the
actions needed to address the complex obstacles to entry and progression often faced by
students and staff from Irish Traveller, black, Asian, minority ethnic or migrant backgrounds. This
approach presents challenges; narrative data often shows how the type of institutional response
needed defies easy categorisation – is this a gender issue or one arising from racial or ethnic
identity? – and requires the integration of multiple strategies to achieve a meaningful response.

Dialogue participants frequently referenced the importance of integrated EDI conversations and
actions to build understanding of shared challenges and those unique to particular groups, and
to work towards integrated solutions that also promote good relations across under-represented
groups.


2. Building capacity to enable institutional change
Measures to address gender inequalities, particularly those arising from the Athena Swan
initiative, were pointed to as a useful reference point to inform institutional approaches to
addressing race and ethnicity inequalities. The importance of data to identify the extent of
gender under-representation, public commitment, and leadership by higher education senior
management to on-the-ground measures and protocols to address unconscious bias were all
cited as useful measures. However, the discussion suggested that an over-confidence may
hinder the efficiency of human resource systems and processes to address race and ethnicity
inequalities. For example, while unconscious bias training is now nearly a given for all those
involved in recruitment, promotion and award giving processes within HEIs, such initiatives by
themselves do not, and cannot, ensure a wider culture of equality and inclusion. Such processes
should be further complemented through the engagement of established academic staff with
wider efforts to address inequalities and exclusion at faculty level for example, training on anti-
racist measures, or checking the inclusivity of academic conferences and activities in terms of
issues covered and diverse representation amongst contributors.

It was frequently observed in the discussion that students and staff in Irish higher education may
have little opportunity to discuss or learn about the similarities and differences of their lived
experiences to those of their peers from Irish Traveller, black, Asian, minority ethnic or migrant
backgrounds. Cultural norms in both Ireland and the UK within higher education are largely
based upon traditional white Irish or white UK mainstream values, and there was a perception
that very limited accommodation was being made at present to understand and accommodate a
wider range of values. While many humanities and social science undergraduate programmes
offer modules on equality, identity and discrimination, there is a near total absence of such
discussion within the typical science undergraduate curriculum. It is notable that only one Irish
university offers Black Studies as a full study module at the time of writing.7




7
    See module at: https://www.ucd.ie/newsandopinion/news/2018/august/01/blackstudiesfocusedmoduleatucd/

                                                                                                           44
A frequent theme was the over-reliance on often junior academics from under-represented
groups to lead and drive the institutional EDI initiatives. This further accentuates inequality by,
for example, diminishing the time available to these academics to undertake the impactful
research that will score highly in their next bid for academic promotion. A strong argument was
made for revisiting HEI work allocations and academic progression metrics to ensure these
recognise advocacy work around EDI issues in general as a meaningful metric for academic
progression.

Finally, a number of participants spoke of feeling uncomfortable or unsure about what to say or
how to discuss race and ethnicity issues. Avoidance of such conversations however had the
unintentional effect in many instances of increasing the burden on the already small numbers of
Irish Traveller, black, Asian, minority ethnic or migrant backgrounds who frequently find
themselves the sole voices identifying and speaking to these issues. There was strong
encouragement given to the notion that a wider body of HE staff should take a more active role
in speaking up and approaching conversations on EDI issues, recognising that at times these
conversations may indeed be uncomfortable. HEIs could, for example, support their staff as a
whole by providing ongoing career development/training modules to reflect on and build
awareness of EDI issues as they relate to teaching, promotion, and HE culture more generally.


3. The role of leadership
The burden of pushing for positive change was considered by those at the forum to fall largely
upon staff from Irish Traveller, Black, Asian, minority ethnic and migrant backgrounds with most
of these noting instances in which they found themselves the sole voice in committee meetings
drawing attention to the need for measures to include and support academic staff and students
from diverse racial and ethnic backgrounds.
Dialogue participants from Irish Traveller, Black, Asian, minority ethnic or migrant backgrounds
spoke of feeing an immense personal sense of responsibility to push for greater equality and
diversity in their host HEI but also of the additional professional burden placed upon them as
they strove to balance this advocacy role with the urgent work needed to progress their
academic and scholarly careers. Campaigning for change was seen to detract from the time and
energy they have available for their core academic and scholarly work and subsequent career
development. Similar experiences were noted by those active in pushing for greater gender
equality within higher education.
Some event participants expressed disquiet at a perceived lack of awareness or responsiveness
on the part of academic leaders to the issues and complexities faced by students and staff from
under-represented groups. It was considered extremely important that higher education leaders
be prepared to visibly engage with and lead positive change and to publicly espouse the benefits
and necessity of a diverse and inclusive university. Suggested measures included senior leaders
becoming familiar with the key lessons and evidence on privilege, the effects of bias and racism
and the issues facing staff from under-represented groups, and to use this knowledge to place
such issues at the heart of institutional conversations and solutions to promote greater equality,
diversity and inclusion.8 Event participants strongly supported this type of active leadership and
participation.



8
 This measure was strongly recommended in the 2019 LERU report, Equality, Diversity and Inclusion in Universities: the
power of a systemic approach.

                                                                                                                     55
4. Data matters
Data is vital to better understand and scope the experience of inequality. An emphasis on
statistics and data collection such as that followed by the Athena Swan charter was judged as
both appropriate and effective in focusing attention on the issues of gender under-
representation. Data provides an impartial snapshot of the situation and can precisely identify
where change is necessary, e.g., the under-representation of female professors. While there are
well-documented limitations and ethical challenges associated with the collection of ethnicity
data, such data can nevertheless play an important role in understanding the experiences of
under-represented groups.9

The UK has developed an extensive data and monitoring system to better understand the
representation of staff from BAME backgrounds staff in academia, as Table 1 shows. It shows
significant under-representation of BAME staff within UK academia generally, with very limited
representation in senior leadership roles. In 2019, just 16% of UK academic staff identified as
black. There are fewer black academic staff than white academic staff at every level,10 and just
27 female black professors.

Currently, the higher education staff data collection instruments used by Irish higher education
institutions (HEIs) do not collect information on race or ethnicity as standard. 11
At the time of writing, it was possible to identify just one full-time black female academic
professorial post-holder in Irish academia, and several post-holders from Asian or other minority
ethnic backgrounds but no nationally verified data is available to confirm this. Similarly, data on
the representation of Irish Travellers or other minority ethnic groups within academic staff is not
available at a national level but such data would be likely to mirror the extremely low
participation rate from students identifying as Irish Travellers within higher education.12

The paucity of data hinders efforts by higher education institutions and bodies such as the Royal
Irish Academy to build better solutions to increase the involvement of under-represented groups
and support their participation in academic life. A vital first step then for Ireland is the collection
of HEI staff data that allows for a disaggregation by ethnicity. In May 2020, the Athena SWAN
Ireland National Intersectionality Working Group produced a statement to provide staff in HEIs
with information on the rationale for collecting ethnicity data and the complexities of
categorisation, and Ireland’s Higher Education Authority has expressed its commitment to
addressing the current data deficiencies.




9
  See the May 2020 Statement by the National Athena SWAN Ireland Intersectionality Working Group on the Use of
Ethnicity Categories in Irish Higher Education, accessed at: https://hea.ie/assets/uploads/2020/07/Intersectionality-WG-
Statement-on-Ethnicity-Categories-in-Irish-HE.pdf
10
   UCL, 2016, ‘The Experiences of Black and Minority Ethnic Staff in Further and Higher Education’, accessed at:
https://www.ucu.org.uk/media/7861/The-experiences-of-black-and-minority-ethnic-staff-in-further-and-higher-
education-Feb-16/pdf/BME_survey_report_Feb161.pdf, p. 2, 20 July 2020.
11
   This issue is relevant to many sectors, not merely the higher education sector. A 2019 report by the Irish Human Rights
and Equality Commission found that Ireland does not have sufficient disaggregated data to allow an adequate and regular
assessment of the extent to which it is meeting its obligations under international law across a range of sectors, with
significant gaps in the national survey and administrative data available on minority ethnic groups, and concerns about its
availability, quality, and use.
12
   The Department of Education and Skills’ 2019 Action Plan to Promote Traveller Participation in Higher Education sets a
target to double the participation of Irish Travellers in higher education from 35 in 2015 to 80 in 2019.

                                                                                                                         66
Table 1: Academic staff from Irish Traveller, Black, Asian
and other Ethnic Minority Groups in the UK and Ireland

 UK UK                                                                     IRELAND
                                                                         Ireland

 •    16% of the total UK academic staff identified as                   In the absence of specific data for Irish higher
      black in 2019.13                                                   education, a 2018 study15 by the Irish Human Rights
                                                                         and Equality Commission and the ESRI is instructive.
 •    A 2015 Equality Challenge Unit report found
      there were just 20 UK-born black and minority                      It found:
      ethnic (BME) deputy or pro vice-chancellors,                       •     People from the black non-Irish group are less
      compared with 530 white ones.14                                          than half (0.4 times) as likely to be employed as
                                                                               the White Irish group and five times as likely to
 •    In 2018-19, none of the 535 staff employed as                            experience discrimination when seeking work.
      ‘managers, directors or senior officials’ across
      British universities identified as black. Twenty-                  •     People from the black Irish group are twice as
      five identified as Asian, mixed or other ethnicity.                      likely to experience discrimination seeking work,
      475 identified as white. The ethnicity of the                            and just under three and a half times (3.4 times)
      remaining 35 was not known (HESA, 2019)                                  as likely to experience discrimination in the
                                                                               workplace, as white Irish.
 •    In 2018-19, 185 of 11,860 non-academic
      managerial roles within higher education were                      •     Both the black non-Irish and black Irish groups
      held by black staff, compared with 10,510 who                            are much less likely to hold a managerial or
      identified as White, 410 as Asian and 165 from a                         professional job.
      mixed background (HESA, 2019).
                                                                         •     The Asian Irish group of people do not differ in
 •    There are 27 black female professors in the UK                           terms of employment rates and are more likely
      university system.                                                       to be working in professional/managerial
                                                                               occupations but are almost twice (1.9 times) as
 •    24% of ethnic minority students had                                      likely to experience workplace discrimination.
      experienced racial harassment (Equality and
      Human Rights Commission, 2019)

           o    Of these, 20% had faced physical
                assaults, while the majority had
                experienced name-calling and various
                forms of micro-aggression.

           o    More than a quarter of staff said they
                experienced racist name-calling, insults
                and jokes. Much of this harassment took
                place in office environments, frequently
                in plain sight of their colleagues.

           o    International students recorded feeling
                unwelcome, isolated and vulnerable.


13
   Presentation by J. Arday to the RIA-BCI workshop, January 30, 2020.
14
   Report accessed at: http://www.ecu.ac.uk/publications/equality-higher-education-statistical-report-2015/
15
   Ethnicity and Nationality in the Irish Labour Market looks at Central Statistics Office data from the Quarterly National Household
Survey Equality Modules from 2004, 2010 and 2014 to capture how labour market outcomes and the experience of discrimination
have changed through the economic boom, recession and early recovery.

                                                                                                                                   77
As previously stated, quantitative data needs to be supplemented with narrative data. There is,
for example, no history of racial climate assessments in either Ireland or the UK compared to the
US (albeit these are relatively new there also). Such assessments offer an opportunity to engage
directly with BAME staff and students to gather their views on the racial climate within their
higher education campus, and provide a useful qualitative element which could be drawn upon
to inform campus specific measures to combat racism and drive equality measures.



Discussion
The low numbers of academic staff from Irish Traveller, BAME or migrant backgrounds,
particularly in senior positions, represents both a deficit and a challenge to be addressed in both
Ireland and the UK. Ireland and the UK’s higher education and further education students come
from a greater diversity of backgrounds and ethnicities than ever before. The importance of
visible role models in positions of authority and leadership is newly appreciated and popularised
by the phrase ‘you can’t be what you can’t see’. Students pursuing higher education studies in
Ireland and the UK quite reasonably expect to see people like them achieving, teaching, doing
research and leading academia. What do the strikingly low numbers of such role models tell
today’s students about how academia welcomes them now as students and as future academic
leaders?

The issue of under-representation extends beyond the staff teaching students to the curriculum
they are taught. To what extent has the higher education sector in Ireland and the UK really
engaged with the debate on the decolonisation of the undergraduate and post-graduate
curriculum? For many at the RIA-British Council in Ireland dialogue, this process should be
accelerated as a matter of urgency with a particular focus in the first instance on the resources
and reading lists provided to students.

As the lessons from tackling gender equality have shown, the higher education sector needs to
consult with under-represented groups to deliver effective initiatives. This includes their
involvement in the organisation, design, implementation, and oversight of equality and diversity
initiatives. The present-day senior leadership should be seen to visibly lead the delivery of EDI
work. Additionally, HEIs should consider their institutional processes and procedures and
commit to actions to address process-driven inequalities and promote genuine diversity in, for
example, recruitment campaigns and procedures as well as promotional metrics.

Finally, even as higher education institutions begin to address the under-representation of
particular groups, there is a danger of increasing the burden on those experiencing the
inequality by implicitly or explicitly expecting them to take a leadership role on-the-ground and
across the sector in speaking out or actioning new measures. The question arises as to who
drives the change? Is it the few or the many? On this point, student unions represent a powerful
force for change with the emergence of specific Ethnic Minority Officer appointments within
student unions and student union-led initiatives aimed to empower ethnic leaders within student
populations. Through their representation in HEI senior management forums within HEIs, student
unions can make a significant contribution both in identifying the issues affecting students and
staff and by holding senior leaders accountable for their responses to these issues.




                                                                                                    88
Suggested measures
Through the discussion, a range of measures were proposed for consideration with the objective
of further embedding an inclusive and welcoming environment for staff from Irish Traveller,
BAME, and migrant backgrounds. A common theme throughout was the need for both institutions
and the individuals within them to take responsibility for action to combat racism and exclusion.
Suggested measures at sectoral and institutional level included:

   •   Engaging directly with BAME, Irish Traveller and migrant staff and students to gather their
       views on the racial climate within their higher education campus. Support academic staff
       to initiate and engage in discussion on their individual school/college engagement with
       EDI issues.

   •   Greater attention to ensuring that there is an inclusive curriculum reflective of the lived
       experiences and histories of all within the higher education environment.

   •   Ensure that Irish Traveller, BAME, and migrant staff are represented within the
       organisation, design, implementation and oversight, of institutional EDI initiatives.

   •   Data on the representation of Irish Travellers, BAME and migrant staff and students within
       HEIs to be collected, collated and publicly reported using agreed national categories.

   •   HEIs should carefully consider the composition of Athena Swan and similar such
       committees to ensure a balanced contribution and representation of higher education
       staff from all career stages and groups.

   •   Greater education and higher levels of participation for higher education staff and
       students on diverse cultural norms and experiences, including the embedding of at least
       one EDI module in all undergraduate teaching.

   •   More developed EDI learning and EDI initiatives which empower staff and students to
       counter racism.

   •   Access to specific training for academic staff to enhance their skills to teach and
       supervise learners from a range of ethnic and cultural backgrounds.




                                                                                                     99
Summary
Ireland’s higher education institutions can tackle racism and embed a truly inclusive culture,
learning from successful international initiatives to build inclusivity into the higher education
system.

Excellence is, and will remain, the key metric of quality in academia. But individual excellence
and achieving equality of outcome in the higher education sector is not a simple linear
progression.

Academic staff from Black, Asian and other ethnic minority backgrounds are significantly under-
represented in UK academic and leadership roles: this is widely understood to hold true for
Ireland also, although to date the higher education staff data collection instruments used by Irish
HEIs do not collect information on race or ethnicity as standard. This virtual absence of data,
either quantitative or qualitative, to identify staff from BAME, Irish Traveller and migrant
backgrounds increases the difficulty of ensuring they are adequately consulted with or included
in higher education decision-making and equality, diversity and inclusion initiatives.

Lessons from initiatives to achieve greater gender equality point to the need for more active
initiatives to recognise challenges and barriers that may arise for particular groups. Collective
action at the HEI level, supported and required as a condition of public funding, has proven vital
to securing the attention and commitment of HEI management in support of gender equality
initiatives and could be further extended to achieve greater race and ethnicity inclusion and
diversity within higher education.

Learnings from the implementation of the Athena Swan Charter to achieve greater gender
equality in academia point to the need for actions to consider institutional systems and
structures such as HR recruitment and diversity training, metrics for academic career
progression but also measures to build awareness of the challenges faced by academic staff and
students Irish Traveller, Black, Asian and other ethnic minority backgrounds. The active
involvement of senior leaders in higher education is crucial: leaders will need to become ever
more directly involved in learning about the issues and challenges faced by their academic staff
and researchers from Irish Traveller, Black, Asian and other ethnic minority backgrounds, and
take an active and visible role in the initiatives to support such academic staff.

Celebrating the success of the exceptional individual who achieves against the odds is joyful and
hopeful but as a national strategy leaves much to be desired. The focus must be on a collective
moving forward rather than individual exceptionalism.




                                                                                                    10
                                                                                                    10
About the Organisers




The Royal Irish Academy/Acadamh Ríoga na hÉireann is Ireland’s leading body of experts
in the sciences, humanities, and social sciences. The Academy champions research and
identifies and recognises Ireland’s world class researchers. It supports scholarship and
promotes awareness of how science and the humanities enrich our lives and benefit society.
Membership of the Academy is by election and is considered the highest academic honour
in Ireland.

www.ria.ie | policy@ria.ie




The British Council is the UK’s international organisation for cultural relations and
educational opportunities. We have been working in Ireland since 1990, partnering with Irish
organisations to encourage cultural, scientific, and other educational co-operation between
Britain and Ireland. We enable Irish and UK organisations and individuals to share their
insight, expertise and knowledge in culture, higher education and science which results in
bespoke programmes and partnerships to mutually benefit Ireland and the UK.

www.britishcouncil.ie | info@ie.britishcouncil.org
