        Race, ethnicity,
 equality and inclusion
   in higher education
 in Ireland and the UK:
                          A dialogue event presented by
the Royal Irish Academy and the British Council in Ireland
            Date: Thursday January 30th 2020, 11.30 – 16.30
          Venue: Academy House, 19 Dawson Street, Dublin 2
Race, ethnicity, equality and inclusion in
higher education in Ireland and the UK:
A dialogue event presented by the Royal Irish Academy
and the British Council

Date:  Thursday January 30th 2020, 11.30 – 16.30
Venue: Academy House, 19 Dawson Street, Dublin 2

Programme
11.30 Registration
12.00 Welcome by Chair, Professor Anita Maguire, Chair of RIA Diversity Committee
       and Vice Chair for Research & Innovation UCC
12.10 Opening remarks by Mags Walsh, Director, British Council in Ireland

12.15   Session 1 ‘How can and should University leadership deliver
        greater inclusion?’
12.15   Keynote by Professor Kathleen James-Chakraborty, Professor of Art History
        in UCD, MRIA Gold Medal Holder
12.45   Keynote by Dr Jason Arday, Assistant Professor in Sociology,
        Durham University
13.15   Break. A light lunch will be provided in Academy House

13.45 - Session 2 ‘What we talk about when we talk about race and ethnicity’
        Panel discussion with
    •   Dr Ebun Joseph, Chair of African Scholars Association Ireland and
        Unforgettable Women’s Network, Career Development Consultant at RCSI
    •   Dr Ross Woods, Senior Manager of Higher Education Authority Centre of
        Excellence for Gender Equality
    •   Professor Anastasia Crickley, Chair, Pavee Point
    •   Dr Michael Isichei, Lecturer in Management & Co-Chair of Queen’s University
        Belfast, BAME and International Staff Network

14.45   Session 3: ‘The Road Ahead’: EDI strategies in policy and practice
        Presentations from
    •   Gary Loke, Director of Knowledge, Innovation and Delivery, Advance HE
    •   Dr Gemma Irvine, Vice President for Equality and Diversity, Maynooth
        University

15.45   Plenary
        Moderated by Chair with panel discussion including Megan Reilly, Union of
        Students in Ireland, Dr Rosaleen McDonagh, Board Member of Pavee Point
        Traveller & Roma Centre, Dr Jason Arday and Dr Ebun Joseph.
16.15   Closing remarks by the President, Royal Irish Academy
Speaker Biographies
Dr Jason Arday is an Assistant Professor in Sociology at Durham University in the
Department of Sociology. Jason is a Visiting Research Fellow at The Ohio State University
in the Office of Diversity and Inclusion, a Research Associate at Nelson Mandela
University in the Centre for Critical Studies in Higher Education Transformation and a
Trustee of the Runnymede Trust, the UK’s leading Race Equality Thinktank. Jason sits
on the Centre for Labour and Social Studies (CLASS) National Advisory Panel and is a
School Governor at Shaftesbury Park Primary School in London. Jason also serves on
the Editorial Boards of Educational Philosophy and Theory; and the British Sociological
Association (BSA) journal Sociology. He speaks regularly at national and international
conferences, as well as public and community events.

Professor Anastasia Crickley was chairperson of the UN Committee for Elimination of
Racial Discrimination from 2016 to 2018 and an elected member from 2010. She was the
first chair of the EU Fundamental Rights Agency (FRA) and has served as a member of the
Advisory Committee for the Council of Europe Framework Convention for the Protection
of National Minorities. From 2004 to 2008 Anastasia was Personal Representative
of the OSCE Chair in Office on Racism, and a member of the Council of State from
2004 until 2011. Until 2015 she was Head of Department of Applied Social Studies at
Maynooth University, Ireland where she championed university access for minorities and
marginalised groups. Anastasia is a founder of the European Network Against Racism,
Pavee Point Traveller & Roma Centre and the Migrants Rights Centre, Ireland. She is a
lifelong advocate for human rights - in particular women’s and the rights of minorities.

Dr Gemma Irvine is Vice-President of Equality & Diversity in Maynooth University
where she leads the strategy on equality and inclusion for both students and staff,
as well as working to expand access and participation programmes for all students
of the University. Prior to this, she served as Head of Policy and Strategic Planning
in the Higher Education Authority. Included in her achievements there were her
leadership of the secretariat for the Irish National Review of Gender Equality in Higher
Education Institutions, and the subsequent Gender Equality Taskforce. In 2012 Dr Irvine
coordinated the formation of the Irish Research Council through the operational merger
of the Irish Research Council for Humanities and Social Sciences and the Irish Research
Council for Science, Engineering and Technology. As Assistant Director of the IRC, she
initiated the development of a gender action plan, a first for a research funding agency in
Ireland.

Dr Michael Isichei is a Lecturer in Management at Queen’s University Belfast (QUB),
a Russell Group university. He completed a PhD in Business at Dublin City University
(DCU) at the age of 25. Prior to completing a PhD, he completed a Bachelor’s degree in
Business Management. He graduated with a first class honours and finished first in his
class. Michael’s research interests include biculturalism, global mobility, and global talent
management. His work has been included in a number of books and academic journals.
Michael’s work has also been published in specialist, practitioner focused magazines,
such as Eolas, and Agenda, which aim to inform decision makers in the South and North
of Ireland, respectively. He also has editorial experience, having previously served as the
Managing Editor of ‘The Rising’, a magazine published by the Redeemed Christian Church
of God in Northern Ireland.

Professor Kathleen James-Chakraborty has since 2007 been Professor of Art
History at University College Dublin; she was previously a professor in the department
of architecture at the University of California Berkeley. Her work has challenged
westerncentric and patriarchal approaches to the history of architecture. In particular,
her book Architecture since 1400 is a global survey, which also fully considers the role of
women in commissions, designing and inhabiting buildings. In addition to her positions
on the boards of scholarly journals and cultural institutions, she was for two years deputy
chair of the Gender Equity Action Group in UCD and a member of the Athena SWAN
Ireland Committee. She was elected to the Royal Irish Academy in 2011 and in 2018 she
became the first woman to be awarded a Royal Irish Academy Gold Medal.

Dr Ebun Joseph is Career Development Consultant at the Royal College of Surgeons in
Ireland and a consultant on race relations. After completing her degree in Microbiology,
she diversified with a PGDip in Adult Guidance and Counselling, and a Masters in
Education by research from NUIM. Dr Joseph completed her PhD at UCD, on the subject
of racial stratification in the Irish labour market. She is Module Coordinator of ‘Black
Studies and Critical Race Perspectives in Education’ at UCD - the first module of its kind
in Ireland. Dr Joseph founded and is Chair of the African Scholars Association Ireland
(AfSAI), and the Unforgettable Women’s Network.

Gary Loke is Director of Knowledge, Innovation and Delivery at Advance HE where
he is responsible for leading on research, thought leadership and content delivery of
Advance HE’s services. Prior to his current role, Gary was Deputy Chief Executive at
Equality Challenge Unit (ECU), which he joined in 2008. He previously worked for an older
persons’ charity on age-related policy issues in health and social care and for a rural
race equality organisation. He is a member of the gender equality commission of the
Swiss National Science Foundation and was a visiting research associate at the Forum for
Research into Equality and Diversity, School of Law, University of Chester. He has most
recently contributed to Arday, J. and Mirza, H. S. ‘Dismantling Race in Higher Education:
Racism, Whiteness and Decolonising the Academy’ (2018).

Professor Anita Maguire is Vice President for Research & Innovation, University
College Cork, and Director of the inter disciplinary Analytical and Biological Chemistry
Research Facility (ABCRF), as well as serving as a member of the UCC Athena SWAN
Steering Group. During her time at UCC she has contributed to the establishment of the
School of Pharmacy, serving as head of this and then the School of Chemistry between
2009-10 and 2005-07 respectively. Professor Maguire has led an active research team
which has made several significant advances, many of these are key for pharmaceutical
application, resulting in extensive interaction with the pharmaceutical sector in Ireland
and internationally. Professor Maguire is the lead Principal Investigator from UCC in the
SFI Synthesis and Solid State Pharmaceutical Centre and was elected to the Royal Irish
Academy in 2014, taking up the role of Vice President for Diversity for the Academy in
2019.

Dr Rosaleen McDonagh is a Traveller woman with a disability. Originally from Sligo, she
is the fourth eldest in a family of twenty children. She worked in Pavee Point Traveller
& Roma Centre for ten years, managing the Violence Against Women programme, and
remains a board member. She is a regular contributor to the Irish Times and has written
ostensibly within the framework of a Traveller feminist perspective. McDonagh’s work
includes Mainstream, The Baby Doll Project, Stuck, She’s Not Mine, and Rings. Rosaleen
was commissioned for a feature article in the Irish Times in 2012 responding to Channel
4’s series My Big Fat Gypsy Wedding. In 2013/2014, she worked with Graeae Theatre on
its WTP programme. As part of this project, she spent two weeks on attachment in The
Royal Court Theatre. Her play Mainstream was directed by Olivier Award winner, Jim
Culleton, for Fishamble and Project Arts Centre in 2016. In 2018, Fishamble produced
Rosaleen’s play Running Out of Road in the RHK to mark the first anniversary of Traveller
Ethnicity recognition. Rosaleen has a BA in Biblical & Theological Studies, an MPhil in
Ethnic & Racial Studies & an MPhil in Creative Writing, all from TCD. She holds a PhD from
Northumbria University.

Megan Reilly is the current Vice President for Equality and Citizenship with the Union
of Students in Ireland. After completing a degree in Commerce in NUI Galway, she
spent two year as a full time officer in the Students’ Union; one as a Welfare Officer and
one as President. Her work now involves focusing on marginalised voices in third level
education. She is a Board member of the Irish Family Planning Association and the Irish
Council for International Students.

Dr Ross Woods is Senior Manager of the Higher Education Authority’s Centre of
Excellence for Gender Equality, which supports sustainable acceleration towards gender
equality within Irish Higher Education Institutions. The centre was established in June
2019 at the recommendation of the Department of Education and Skills’ Gender Equality
Taskforce, as part of their Gender Action Plan 2018-2020. The vision for this plan is that
Ireland will be a world-leading country for gender equality in HE by 2026. The centre
aims to work towards this goal by enabling data-driven decision-making, acting as a
centralised support for HEI’s, facilitating the sharing of good practice and through
targeted funding initiatives. One such scheme is the recently launched Senior Academic
Leadership Initiative (SALI), which aims to address the significant under-representation of
women at senior academic levels in Irish HEIs.
Speakers




            Dr. Jason      Professor
             Arday      Anastasia Crickley




  Dr Ebun    Gary           Professor
  Joseph     Loke         Anita Maguire
Dr Gemma      Dr. Michael   Professor Kathleen
  Irvine        Isichei     James-Chakraborty




Dr Rosaleen     Megan            Dr Ross
 McDonagh       Reilly           Woods
