Capturing dissonance in university teacher education environments

Abstract
In response to policy developments in Higher Education in the United Kingdom, the Institute for Learning and Teaching in Higher Education (ILTHE) was established in 1999 to provide a national framework for teaching and learning at tertiary level. This paper considers the training environment of novice lecturers within the ILTHE framework and identifies areas of tensions within it. Activity systems theory (Engeström, 2000; 2001) is used as a broad framework for apprehending this environment. Praxis-related, epistemological, structural and ideological dissonances are identified. Suggestions to advance change in this area are formulated in the light of the main findings. The limitations afforded by the activity systems approach are also discussed.

Introduction
This paper investigates the new forms of training offered to novice lecturers in UK universities within the framework of courses accredited by the Institute for Learning and Teaching in Higher Education (ILTHE). This training initiative is considered, in the first instance, within the broader context of UK Higher Education (HE), following the 1992 integration of public sector institutions (polytechnics) into the university sector. Data collected at three UK universities are then used to identify areas of tensions (dissonances) in the training environment of UK HE lecturers. 

The dissonances identified in this study can be partly explained by the relative novelty of the provision and the inadequacy of pedagogical concerns within Higher Education until quite recently. This study shows that issues inherent in the structures of departments and institutions also contribute to dissonance. However, above all, dissonances stem from the 'object of study' itself. Teaching and learning to teach broach complex and contested issues, and are therefore by their very nature generators of dissonance.

Context and scope for this study
There are over 100 courses for lecturers across the UK that have been accredited by the ILTHE. These courses were all scrutinised for accreditation by a panel of ILTHE representatives. These programmes include as a requirement the following course components: teaching, assessment, planning and design of learning activities, student support, reflective practice and personal development. ILTHE requirements also include a set of ‘professional values’ focused on scholarship, collegiality, student-centred approaches, encouraging participation in HE, equality of educational opportunity and reflective practice. Most courses are validated as Post-graduate Certificates and carry credits like any other UK Higher Education course. A few have also attached a Post-graduate Diploma or an MA to the initial Post-graduate Certificate. For the sake of coherence and comparability, this study focuses on Post-graduate Certificate courses. The term ‘course’ or ‘courses’ is used throughout this paper to designate courses for new lecturers that have been accredited by the ILTHE.

Before looking into the details of the ILTHE accredited courses environment, this paper will consider the background that led to its creation. In the first instance, the ILTHE initiative is historicized in the light of the Dearing (1997) and Booth (1998) reports and of the ILTHE’s consultation paper (ILTHE, 1998). The methodological and conceptual framework is then outlined. The study then turns to interview data collected at three UK universities. The analysis enables me to capture the knowledge base for HE teacher training in the ILTHE context, and to identify areas of dissonances within the courses, and beyond, in the ‘practice space’.  In the first instance the analysis focuses on two areas of dissonance in the ILTHE syllabus, ‘reflection’ and ‘values’. A typology of dissonances across the curriculum is then offered. The last section of this paper summarises the main findings and reflects on the chosen methodological tool for this study, Engeström’s activity systems theory.

Background to the ILTHE initiative:  functionalism meeting progressivism
I turn first of all to the documentary data to briefly probe the context in which the ILTHE initiative was set up. The dominant perspective in HE discourse, very much conveyed in the policy documents used for this study, is that of liberal functionalism. This discourse provides a way of reconciling two possibly conflicting views as to the function of Higher Education: on the one hand, the ‘humanist’ view of education as developing the individual as a whole and, on the other, the view that Higher Education should service society through developing ‘human capital’.  The Dearing Report (1997) provides a good example of this in establishing a link between Higher Education and economic imperatives whilst seeking to ‘maintain a cohesive society and a rich culture’ (NCIHE, 1997, 1.2). The promotion by Dearing of sector diversification (NCIHE, 1997, 1.6) reinforces the 'polarisation' model highlighted by Frank Coffield (1997, 5) in seeking to produce individuals whose competences will tally with existing and forthcoming patterns of employment. Whilst accounting for new forms of curricula (NCIHE, 1997, 6.48) this stance also appears to condone the divide between the ‘new’ and the ‘old’ HE sectors in spite of their official unification through a national objective identified as ‘enabl[ing] the UK to compete effectively in the next century in a world where the quality, relevance and effectiveness of education and training systems will underpin future prosperity’ (NCIHE, 1997, 8.76). The Dearing vision was to pave the way for a contested operational terrain for the ILTHE.

In the wake of Dearing, the Booth committee was set-up to assist in establishing the ILTHE as a 'self-regulatory' body that would promote 'excellence in teaching'. It became part of a constellation of bodies interacting to 'maintain' the HE system through government interventions, mainly driven by the funding bodies and the national inspectorate function, the Quality Assurance Agency (QAA). The ILTHE’s professionalizing mission was not interpreted by its founders as a gate-keeping activity aiming to regulate entry to the profession but rather as a crusade to 'redress the balance between teaching and research' (ILTHE, 1998, para 5). This was to become a beacon statement and is commonplace in much of the literature referring to the rationale behind the foundation of the ILTHE. The Institute’s main mission is to ‘provide professional standing for teachers in Higher Education’ (ILTHE, 1998, para 4). Its statutes clearly set the ILTHE as an organisation independent of other organisations and of funding bodies, with no formal links to the HE funding councils or the QAA.  It has however developed collaborative links with SEDA (Staff and Educational Development Association), HESDA (Higher Education Staff Development Agency), FENTO (Further Education National Training Organisation) and LTSN (Learning and Teaching Subject Networks) and interacts with these bodies, responding to the same national educational orientations. The ILTHE’s core precepts for professional practice define a set of knowledge components illustrative of competence. As indicated earlier, this approach also promotes reflective practice and a set of professional values as inherent in its curriculum. While echoing the national agenda of encouraging socially deprived participation this curricular agenda combines the functional approach with progressive teaching practices (student-centred approaches) within a ‘progressive’ ethos (personal and professional development through reflection).

In its initial consultation, the ILTHE initially adopted a competence-based approach to defining excellence. Assessment consisted in a list of twenty-four outcomes, a stance condemned by the consulting bodies as reflecting a mechanistic approach to teaching. This was later abandoned for a more holistic approach - although it is possible to claim that the outcome-based approach was then transferred to the courses themselves. Indeed, all courses that carry a post-graduate award must be compliant with the QAA National Qualifications Framework (QAA, 2001) and work within a learning outcomes framework which tends to rationalise (label and organise) the ILTHE's core aspects of knowledge. I will show in this paper that alignment between the ILTHE holistic framework and the outcomes-based framework within which courses operate, can be perceived as precarious.

At the time of publishing, as the UK HE community debates the implications of the government’s White Paper, The Future of Higher Education (DfES, 2003), it appears that the ILTHE’s function within the new ‘Academy’ may become limited to its accreditation activities. It is likely that the present framework will be revisited to accommodate the new proposed teaching standards. 

Methodological and conceptual framework
Interview data for this study were collected at three UK universities. Three ILTHE accredited course directors (CD) and 5 course participants (CP) were interviewed in a semi-structured set-up. The course directors were asked to describe their programme and the teaching methods used to achieve their objectives. Course directors were also asked to identify areas in which they were experiencing difficulties with the curriculum. Course participants, all novice lecturers with less than three years experience of teaching in HE, were asked to identify what they valued most about the training programme, what they found most and least useful and the difficulties they were experiencing. The data were analysed thematically, the themes being considered across the sample, in order to identify curriculum components and, within them, areas of dissonance. A key informant (KI) interview was also carried out at the ILTHE headquarters. In this interview, I sought to establish how the existing framework was arrived at. As the areas of ‘reflection’ and ‘values’ had been identified as problematic by the respondents, specific questions were asked on why the reflective practitioner model was promoted, how the set of professional values for teaching was arrived at, and how it was envisaged that these values would be conveyed and assessed. The key informant was also invited to reflect on the tensions between course provision and departments. Being aware of the specific status of the KI data as emanating from a key actor within ILTHE who might have been asserting ‘subtle control’ over what was being discussed (Ball, 1994), I use the KI data as just one other voice in the systems considered. I am indeed more concerned with respondents’ perceptions of their situation than with trying to make generalisations concerning the status or efficiency of the training provision. 

As indicated earlier, context is all important in making sense of an initiative of this nature. I have for this reason chosen to use a framework for analysis that accounts for historical and structural contexts. Social practice theory, in particular Engeström’s activity systems theory, itself an expansion of activity theory, was used to do this. Cultural-historical activity theory was initially developed in Russia in the 1920s and 1930s, under the impulse of Lev Vygotsky and Alexei Leont’ev, to incorporate the social and structural dimensions into the study of human activity. This tradition was taken up by radical researchers in the 1970s and was further developed in the 1980s and 1990s mainly by Yrjö Engeström at the University of Helsinki, who expanded this framework to bring together the multiple perspectives and complex networks at work in any given human activity. Activity systems theory was chosen for this study in order to reflect the complexity of the learning framework under study. By taking account of the interactions between people involved in the activity, structures within which the activity takes place, conventions on which it is based and artefacts used (here, teaching tools and methods), I was able to ground my study in the broad context and capture practice as socially situated rather than simply evidenced in actions or performance. Although Engeström’s model proved very useful in locating tensions within and across the two systems under study, some limitations were identified in the exploration of agentic elements within the systems. These particularly came to light when considering respondents’ positioning towards ‘values’ and ‘actual practices’ (as opposed to ‘espoused practices’) and will be discussed further.


The learning environment of novice lecturers

Learning and teaching activity systems 
The framework within which I am working to study the learning environment of novice lecturers is shown in Fig.1 where Engeström's model (Engeström 2001, 13) of activity systems is used.  

INSERT FIGURE 1 HERE 

On the left hand-side, activity system 1 shows what is happening within the course environment, on the right hand-side, activity system 2 illustrates activities in the lecturer’s practice. The upper triangle in each system shows the ‘subject’ as the agent carrying out the activity, the ‘object’ refers to the raw material at which the activity (teaching) is directed, and the ‘instruments’ indicate how the activity is mediated, here mainly through a syllabus, a set of teaching methods, a teaching infrastructure. This triangle forms the upper part of a larger triangle whose base relates the activity to the wider context and structures: the ‘community’ to which the activity relates and the ‘rules’ and ‘division of labour’ relevant to the activity. These illuminate issues of division of tasks and power, and refer to the rules, norms and conventions within which the activity occurs. It is essential to mention at this stage and bear in mind throughout that the two activity systems under study have interfaces with other activity systems in the wider community of practice, mainly the department, the institution, and in the wider community, the ILTHE and the discipline. This paper examines circulation and tensions within and across the two activity systems to investigate knowledge in action within activity system 1 and knowledge reconstruction in activity system 2 in which the object (new lecturer) becomes subject, in order to identify the dissonances 1) at the level of acquisition (in activity system 1) and in use (in activity system 2). This is done with reference to the meta-structure – forming the base of the triangles – which enables us to take knowledge out of its cognitive mould and accounts for socially and historically situated impacts.

Learning in activity system 1: pedagogical underpinnings
Having established that the macro-level was important to study the training environment of lecturers, I look briefly at how the courses under study approach learning and the implications for the educational strategies and ethos in these environments. McGuiness’ study of educational development courses (1997, 17) shows that educational developers tend to favour participation over control and have a constructionist view of learning. They tend to favour progressive or social re-constructionist (in Trowler’s terminology, 1998, 74) educational ideologies. These encourage student-centred methodologies, active pedagogy with an emphasis on personal development rather than propositional knowledge (Trowler, 1998, 70). This developmental theme was indeed an underlying thread in the interviews with course directors in this study, occasionally taking over corporate priorities. A respondent in the present study admitted to being ‘ferociously developmental’ (CD2). Learning as qualified by the course directors’ presents some of the essential characteristics identified by Blackler (1995, 1040) - it is mediated in a collaborative informal framework. It includes teaching strategies involving negotiation of content and a collective, dialogical approach (reading circles, discussions). The curriculum is ‘flexible’ and knowledge is perceived as provisional and constantly revisited within the reflective framework. It is pragmatic as it refers to issues participants might experience in their practice. Finally, it is contested within the course activity system as ‘conflicting discourses’ are encouraged to co-exist to effect a ‘clarifying mechanism’ (CD3). This epistemological stance (active pedagogy, reflective practice, resconstructionist educational ideology) is an important source of dissonance between activity system 1 and activity system 2. This is discussed later in this study where respondents explain the difficulties they experience in transferring methodologies explored in the course to their practice.

The function of ‘reflection’ and ‘values’ in the activity systems
Reflection and values came across as the main areas of dissonance in the systems. As inherent in the ILTHE syllabus, these components were interpreted in very different ways by the respondents in this study. This section shows how the ambiguous function of the two components contributes to this dissonance.

Rich interpretations of reflection
Eraut (1995) shows that Schön’s (1983, 1987) main contribution to the reflective practitioner debate, notwithstanding the inconsistencies he identifies in his work, is to have problematized professional practice and introduced a theory of self-knowledge which privileges internal reflective processes in reaction to more positivist models of competence. The key informant in this study confirmed that this model had been adopted by ILTHE as it was already present in the culture of educational developers who had transferred it from medical practice: 

It was almost in the culture already […] Yes and we were very explicitly trying to develop something that would match with the culture that was already there, rather than develop something new (KI) 

From the KI’s point of view, reflection was used to operate a paradigm shift away from teaching seen as an ‘innate ability’ or a ‘craft skill’ towards apprehending teaching as ‘a process with which to engage’ (KI).  This statement perceives of reflective practice, in true Schönian fashion, as a soft epistemology devised to respond to more rationalistic ways of thinking about teaching. In this light, reflective practice is envisaged as an ideological stance rivalling the scientific paradigm (Schön, 1983, 49). 

In the systems under study here, reflection was rather perceived by course directors as a heuristic method for knowledge production.  Its status in the course reflects course directors’ own belief framework. Thus for CD1, reflection is merely a method for participants to ‘reflect on how they have done’ whilst CD2’s framework for reflection focuses more on his own corporate preoccupations and includes ‘a discussion of how one might positively influence the issue of student progression and achievement to get better degree results’ (CD2). CD3’s perception is closer to Brookfield’s (1995) critical reflection on practice, ‘a sustained questioning dialogue’. 

The methods used by course directors to promote reflection vary but all include some heuristic framework for exploring practice and rely on emotional triggers of a ‘gestalt’ nature, exploring tensions, with the transformative property of developing ‘a kind of kairos’ (transformation through faith) (CD3). The rich interpretations of reflection identified here might suggest that it is not so much seen as a discrete course element or a distinct form of practice but rather as a metaphor for problematizing professional practice. 

Whilst the course directors’ versions of reflection are quite sophisticated, awareness of its limitations - as an exercise in ‘self-justification and chastising [oneself]’ (CD3)- was also present. This advanced perception of reflection is not necessarily reflected in course participants’ experience. Unless they had specific training in reflective practice themselves, they tended to consider reflection a naturally occurring phenomenon, although their description of this phenomenon would call to mind rather diminutive versions of reflection - ‘we’ve all done it before’ (CP1) or ‘you are driving your car and you think about what you’ve done yesterday’ (CP2) or ‘it’s something I would do quite naturally’ (CP4) - which is not very distinguishable from ‘mere thinking about practice’ (Parker, 1997, 30).

The interference of personal constructs was also identified as a sub-motive by the key informant in this study who clearly established links between course directors’ perceptions of good practice and their approach to teaching. This introduces a subordination dimension in the subject-object relation that cannot be quite be accounted for in Engeström’s model, a fact highlighted by Blackler who states that ‘activity theory is weak in the analysis it offers of the relationship between knowledge and power’ (Blackler, 1995, 1039). Furthermore, the emotive dimension which came across both in CDs and CPs responses, is also quite absent from this framework. The management of emotions although acknowledged in some areas of the literature on learning (Mayer & Salovey, 1997; Goleman, 1996; Gardner, 1999) remains absent from the activity systems triangles.

Ambiguous status of values 
The ILTHE values framework raises a number of issues that cannot be addressed within the scope of this paper. In the context of identifying dissonances, I now consider the set of ILTHE values within the course. A degree of ambiguity as to their function comes across in the key informant’s statement that ILTHE values were initially felt to be the premise to a professional code of practice - located in the ‘rules’ node of the triangle - and had therefore been drawn from an existing orthodoxy amongst practitioners as exemplifying a kind of consensus, not denied by the consultation exercise. In this sense, the set of values promoted by the courses can be seen as a form of reified knowledge in Wenger’s sense (Wenger 1998, 58). At the same time, the key informant presented this set of values as a ‘subject of inquiry’, a platform for debate to trigger reflection on practice - which would rather locate them at the top node of the triangle. This apparent dual role for values finds a resolution in Wenger’s framework (Wenger, 1998) where he shows that meaning is negotiated through participation (debating values) and reification (the set of values), as a process of absorption within a community of practice. A tenuous link with what Saunders & Machell (2000) call ‘neo-correspondence’ is also perceived in so far as this set of values represents the generic professional capabilities and attitudes expected from a HE lecturer. 

At the micro-level of the course, the same multifarious apprehension of values transpires. Although course directors claim to use them more as a cognitive tool for exploring boundaries than as a codifier of behaviour, positions become very complex when investigating the teaching methods used to ‘impart’ them. CD 2 assumes in a somewhat positivist perspective that they are there all the time and his role is only ‘to make them explicit’.  Values are seen as needing to be drawn to the forefront through some kind of eliciting process through reflection. For CD 1 they are difficult to distinguish from knowledge (an example is given where views on surface learning come across as a ‘value’ because they relate to certain epistemic discipline traditions). A distinction seems to appear between those values that can be taught because of their prescriptive nature (equal opportunities) and those ‘softer’ ones that are addressed through debate and example. Debate and exemplarity (‘leading by example’) are the main teaching strategies used in respect of values, both of which are likely to yield uncontrolled outcomes. 

The issue of assessing values was perceived as contentious. Whilst objections towards assessing people on what they believe are understandable, a course director also praised his system for making it possible to fail students on account of not adhering to values. Contradictions of this nature may reflect the relative arbitrariness of the values’ function.  The ILTHE respondent in this study concedes that ‘there is a question about the extent to which people’s practice is actually determined by their values and to what extent it isn’t’. Course participants tended to find these values uncontroversial - CP4 epitomizes this position by stating that ‘they are quite obvious really’. It would be naïve to interpret this as unqualified assent. Course participants’ silence on the subject of values seems to me to signify rather that the topic involving moral and personal constructs is seen as almost taboo. The sensitiveness of this terrain transpires when several of them mention at this stage that some of their more senior colleagues ‘might have problems with some of these values’. This comment resonates with issues discussed in the next section where ideological tensions between course and departments are identified. 

Some limitations of the activity systems framework

As mentioned earlier in this section, agency and intentionality are not properly accounted for in the activity systems framework. There is also a psychological component that comes into play when broaching the issue of values which also seems understated in the framework. Tirri et al (1999) in their empirical study of Swedish teachers epistemological stance show that there is a constant interaction between professional and moral justifications in the way teachers approach their practice. 

Furthermore, the location, within the systems, of ‘reflection’ and ‘values’ is unclear. As a competing epistemology to the technical rational view on teaching, reflection would most certainly reside in the meta-structure, at the ‘rules, conventions’ node. If reflection is simply a meta-cognitive tool, it is likely to be sited in the apex node of the top triangle, as mediating the activity. As for values, as commodified codes for acceptable professional conduct, they would reside at the ‘rules’ node of the system. However, they have also been interpreted as a metacognitive tool to access ethical constructs. KI stated that values provided ‘a framework of inquiry […] that would encourage people to reflect on how you would actually engage with that in practice’ and all three course directors in this study mentioned discussing, debating and even contesting (CD3) value positions. In this context, both reflection and values could therefore tentatively be related to the mediation instruments forming the apex node of the first activity system, and at the ‘rules, conventions’ node, within the meta-structure where the activity is taking place. 


Typology of dissonances within and across the two activity systems
Trowler & Cooper (2002) show that incongruities between the ‘teaching and learning regimes’ - namely a ‘constellation’ of self-theories, power issues, and discipline-based discourses, practices and epistemic assumptions - of educational developers and of course participants may have a significant impact on the quality of learning occurring on developmental programmes for new lecturers. Dissonances of the same type located across and within the two activity systems were identified in this study.

Participants’ positioning towards the course was seen as oscillating on a continuum between alignment with and disjunction from concepts expounded in the course. Their positions contained 'a mixture of adaptative and oppositional elements'  (Hall, 1980, 137). Signs of alignment included the notion of feasibility, the ability to adapt practices. This was generally signalled by the ability on the part of respondents to speak positively of their experience on the course and to give examples taken from their practice. Disjunctions transpired on the other hand when they expressed an inability to reconstruct practices explored in the courses, at local level - often on epistemological grounds, or by invoking practical or structural causes.

Dissonances, including those stemming from participants’ positioning, are analysed now with reference to the wider underpinning communities of practice.  Although dissonances have been categorised as belonging in a) epistemic and curricular paradoxes, b) praxis-related issues c) structural incongruities and hindrances and d) collective and individual ideologies, it is worth noting that several factors can concur to produce dissonances.

Epistemic and curricular paradoxes
Some dissonances around the status and evaluation of reflective skills and ethical principles were outlined in the multi-voiced discourses identified in the previous section regarding the location and status of reflection and values. The ILTHE key informant pointed to two further contested areas. The first one regards assessing reflective practice as espoused theory rather than theory in use. Indeed it is ‘ability to talk about practice’ rather than practice itself which is taken into account by assessors. This raised for this key informant the related issue of what might constitute valid evidence that values or reflection are inherent in people’s practice. The same disquiet was evident in course directors’ views when they expressed concern that participants might produce a ‘reasonable imitation’ of reflection or a ‘convincing’ argument about values they don’t practice. 

Curricular paradoxes were identified too. The most obvious one relates to the difficulty of having explicit marking criteria set against implicit elements of practice, the absence of which might jeopardise the reliability of the assessment. A further dissonance relates to alignment of course with the Masters level of the National Qualifications Framework (QAA, 2001) which can encourages assessment of espoused theory, as discussed in seminars, rather than actual practice and skills. Another paradox flows from the ambiguous status of values in the curriculum explored in the previous section; values may come across as a minor element of the programme for accreditors of programmes if they are only considered as a meta-cognitive tool, whilst an interpretation by course designers of values as rooted in ontological views of education will warrant them a prominent position on the course. A similar phenomenon is observed by Neumann in her study on discipline epistemologies and their impact on teaching methods (Neumann 2001, 139).

Praxis-related issues
Dissonances were identified within course directors’ own practices, mainly relating to the perceived gap between their espoused theories and their practice. This applied in particular to their espoused intentions of developing reflection on teaching, which was simultaneously qualified as being ‘a bit ambitious’ or not always sufficient – behaviours in the classroom were seen to matter too. Reservations on the virtue of reflection were also voiced.

Amongst course participants, praxis incongruities took the shape of an inability to transfer what was taught on the course. This difficulty of reconstructing in a different context can be in part explained by non-coincidence of teaching practices in the departments and those used in the training workshops, which, as mentioned earlier, are, by and large, inductive and participative. However, course participants’ positioning here played an important role, showing how individuals actively construct their own meanings. CP 1 and CP 3 for example saw their teaching context as very different from that discussed in the workshops. The latter saw her discipline as vocational rather than academic, the former coming from a scientific background saw recurrent practices in his department as in some kind of conflict with less conventional practices explored in the workshops. These - on the face of it - purely practical reasons may of course also signify incompatibilities of the kind discussed in the next section which relate rather to the status of the module taught in the department (theoretical modules may have a higher status than practical modules), the discipline culture, or the ideological views on education held by departments or the course participant, as well as the position of novice held by respondents in their departments. 

Another aspect of praxis-related dissonances concerns what might be called ‘deleterious’ practices, namely the misapprehensions about practice that might result from appropriating the language but not the concepts about practice, a phenomenon encapsulated in Wertsch’s notion of ‘mastery’ as different from ‘appropriation’ (Wertsch, 1998, 46 - 58). A respondent who felt impeded by the requirements of validating professional bodies in introducing negotiated assessment held a very reductive definition of this type of assessment: to ‘tell the students to decide if [they] have met [the criteria] or not’. In the same way this respondent found that the main impediment to developing ‘student autonomy’ was lack of time on the part of students – ‘they have so many hours on their time-table!’ An appended reason for failing to transfer the notion of autonomy was expressed as ‘sending them off with a study package […] they would just flounder’ or ‘would be caught between two models’ of learning. It is interesting to notice that the same deleterious effect of misapprehended concepts was identified by the same respondent in her own students. However, as a subject in activity system 2, she was able to see in her students the ‘common error’ of being unable to distinguish between theory and practice but could not identify short-comings in what she had taken away as knowledge from her object position in activity system 1.

Structural incongruities and hindrances 
Institutional funding arrangements – which tend to subsidise departments on a per capita model – may have unpredictable outcomes in inciting departments to promote different teaching methods for different groups of students reserving the most resource-intensive methodologies for their ‘own’ students. This was put forward by some course participants as an argument by departments for resorting to less innovative methods. Most commonly put forward by these respondents were structural hindrances including lack of time, emphasis on the research agenda and large student groups. Limitations were also felt, as previously mentioned, in respect of the surveillance by external validating bodies. Legitimate peripheral participation (Lave & Wenger, 1991) was also denied in the case of very junior staff members in respect of assessment and in departments that had ear-marked some of their provision for the delivery of ‘key skills’ - where less traditional methods seemed to be permitted but remained outside the grasp of the majority of staff. In Billett’s view, which promotes co-participation as a pedagogy of community, restricted access is the principal hindrance to learning (Billett, 2002, 93).

In the same way, course participants’ junior positions in the department were mentioned as an obstacle to innovation. It was felt by one of them that a ‘real sea change’ was needed for her to be able to transfer some practices discussed on the course into her teaching repertoire. The same marine metaphor was used by one course director who thought innovation was difficult for newcomers who ‘feel they are going against the tide’ and seem to seek refuge within activity system 1 to combat this resistance coming not only from colleagues but also from students. These structural dissonances tend to promote a vision of course environments as enclaves of innovation, agents of change within the institutional setting. (Saunders, 1986,1988, 1999). 

Collective and individual ideologies 
In this study it appeared that some communities of practice may exclude themselves from some forms of innovative teaching and assessment practices discussed in the training environments, because of epistemic or ontological traditions within their disciplines. Such practices were only tentatively mentioned by course participants as instances of ‘staleness’ (CP1) or ‘closure’ (CP5) but course directors were, on the whole, more articulate about ideological contradictions they perceived between the two activity systems, although these were generally tinted with their own perceptions of discipline epistemic assumptions or ideological slants. Issues of attitude to knowledge and power relations, of differing values between the two systems, of gender and identities were also put forward.  The location for the course – and its more or less obvious affiliation with areas of a university dealing with quality issues – was also noted as an inhibitor. A nefarious outcome of these ideological dissonances was that any interest in the course might stigmatise participants within departments and label them as less intellectually rigorous than their colleagues (CD3).

Issues dealing with participants’ own perceptions of learning and teaching and their own educational ideologies were identified, many referring to their own experiences as students. A narrative of isolation was also present. Where communities of practice were generally more engaged in research pursuits than teaching, a fear of innovation was expressed – feeling less in control when using problem-based learning approaches for example. Respondents indicated that they valued the socialisation and acculturation aspects of the course as counteracting isolation they might feel in respect of teaching within departments whose main interest was research. Their stance as to the use vs. exchange value of the course was ambivalent, inevitably issues of job security were raised but some intrinsic value, e.g. desire to learn and improve, was also almost invariably present.

Summary of main findings
This study on the training environment of novice UK HE lecturers has highlighted areas of dissonances which are summarised in Table 1. Although some form of consensus was identified, mainly around the educational philosophy underlying these courses illustrated in the teaching methodology, not all teaching methods in activity system 1 were consonant. The teaching of reflection was a praxis-related area of dissonance. Dissonances labelled epistemic and curricular related to the status and assessment of reflection and values on the course. Structural dissonances included location of the course and possible interference with other corporate roles held by course directors. 

In activity system 2, structural issues (departmental hierarchies, funding arrangements) concurred with competing ideologies in the department or disciplinary epistemological assumptions to form obstacles to transferability and consequently limit instances of innovation in the department. In this activity system too, the related issue of deleterious practice was also identified as a praxis-related dissonance. Self-theories and personal constructs, though not strictly accounted for in the activity systems, were also included, where relevant, as disjunctive factors.

INSERT TABLE I HERE

Conclusions
Within the limits of this study, I have shown how dissonances can be identified and located within the two activity systems under consideration within a perspective of professional practice that accounts for individual agency whilst also taking into consideration the impact of larger social and historical structures. I have shown in particular how these dissonances might derive from competing educational ideologies between the two activity systems. I have also highlighted areas of dissonance that are more embedded in systems and structures. Intrinsic dissonances, mainly of an epistemological nature, were also perceived within individual curricula. I have shown that praxis-related dissonances resulted in inability to transfer, or deleterious practice, whilst acknowledging that there examples of good practice and of reconstruction at local level.

The main methodological tool used in this study, Engeström’s activity systems, provides a perspective on HE teacher training that takes account of the wider social and historical context, and stresses the relational links between the different elements of the systems. This provides two main benefits: it removes the emphasis from the purely cognitive, drawing attention to contingent impacting factors through a historicist lens; it also helps locate and relate elements, including areas of conflicts.  It is for instance clear in this model that as object in activity system 1, the novice lecturer belongs in a different community of practice from that in activity system 2.   This is an important factor in the dissonances identified in this study in terms of its implications for reconstruction of knowledge, status and legitimacy of practice. There are however limitations to this framework. As observed in this study, it leaves out some dimensions of learning (emotional elements) and generally provides little light on the impact of agency (personal constructs, self-theories, motivation and positionings) in learning. In particular little is evoked of the subject-object relation that fully accounts for power and control issues. The activity systems framework also envisages its component categories as securely and legitimately located at the nodes of the triangles. Thus, for example, ‘mediating tools’ appear legitimised by the community in which they belong. We saw however in this study that ‘reflection’ and ‘values’ were prone to indeterminacy in terms of their location within an activity system, and open to interpretation and manipulation.  

Finally, it may be useful to consider the implications of these findings for the interactions between course structures and meta-structures. Change is a complex, systemic process in which ‘global’ vision must coincide with ‘local’ implementation (Knight & Trowler, 2001). To be effective, conceptual changes must run parallel with organisational changes. Dissonances identified in this study exemplify this gap between the local and the global with implications in terms of course location, link to the disciplines, institutional and departmental organisational arrangements. The study also highlights, through these dissonances, the fact that training for quality teaching in Higher Education cannot in itself bridge the gap between research and teaching or promote teaching excellence. Unless structural issues are taken into consideration alongside epistemic and agentic issues, this could be termed a 'mission impossible'. Enabling the involvement of a novice lecturer’s primary community of practice would sustain a process of cultural change, bearing in mind that, within the present structures, training is seen as a short-term, ‘bolted-on’ activity whilst the department is the prime, long-term locus of practice. 

In the process of reflecting on the training context, the definition of teaching in Higher Education may evolve towards what Barnett terms a 'holy alliance' of teaching and research which would remove the dichotomy between them (Barnett, 2000, 162). For this to happen, ‘networks of meaning’ (Alvesson, 2002) will need to be constructed in which contestation and differentiation can co-exist. This paper is an attempt to provide one such contribution to meaning construction. Further investigations will certainly have to focus on ways of promoting conceptual and organisational changes that will enable this dialogic post-modern alliance. 

 REFERENCES

ALVESSON, M. (2002) Understanding Organisational Culture (London, Sage)

BALL, S. (1994) Political interviews and the politics of interviewing in G. Walford (Eds), Researching the Powerful in Education (London, UCL Press) 

BARNETT, R. (2000) Realising the University in an age of supercomplexity (Buckingham, SRHE & OUP)

BILLETT, S. (2002) Workplaces, communities and pedagogy, an activity theory view in M. R. Lea & K. Nicoll (Eds) Distributed Learning, Social and cultural approaches to practice (London, Routledge Falmer)

BLACKLER, F. (1995) Knowledge, Knowledge Work and Organizations, An Overview and Interpretation, Organization Studies, 16 (6) pp 1021-1046

BROOKFIELD, S. (1995) Becoming a Critically Reflective Teacher (San Fransisco, Jossey Bass)

COFFIELD, F. (1997) Can the UK become a leaning society? The Fourth Annual Lecture, School of Education (Kings College, London)

DEPARTMENT FOR EDUCATION AND SKILLS (DfES) (2003) The Future of Higher Education (London: HMSO) 

ENGESTRÖM, Y. (2000) Comment on Blackler et al. Activity Theory and the Social Construction of Knowledge, A Story of Four Umpires, Organization Journal, 7(2) pp 301-310

ENGESTRÖM, Y. (2001) Expansive Learning at Work, toward an activity theoretical reconceptualization, Journal of Education and Work, 14, 1 pp 133- 156

ERAUT, M.  (1995) Schön Shock, a case for reframing reflection-in-action? Teachers and Teaching, Theory and Practice, 1(1) pp 9-22

GARDNER, H. (1999) Intelligence Reframed (New York, Basic Books)

GOLEMAN, D. (1996) Emotional Intelligence (London, Bloomsbury)

HALL, S. (1980) Encoding/Decoding, in Hall, S. (Ed) Culture, Media, Language, Working Papers in Cultural Studies, 1972-1979 (London & Melbourne, Hutchinson) 

INSTITUTE FOR LEARNING AND TEACHING IN HIGHER EDUCATION (1998) Implementing the Vision, (York, ILTHE)

KNIGHT, T. & TROWLER, P. (2001) Departmental Leadership in Higher Education, (Buckingham: SRHE & OUP)

LAVE, J. & WENGER, E. (1991) Situated Learning, Legitimate Peripheral Participation (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press)

MAYER, J. & SALOVEY, P. (1997) What is Emotional Intelligence in P. Salovey & D. J. Sluyter (Eds) Emotional Development and Emotional Intelligence, Educational Implications (New York, Basic Books) 

MCGUINNESS, C. (1997) What constitutes good learning and teaching in higher education? Views from staff development handbooks. Psychology Teaching Review, 6/1 pp14-22

NEUMANN, R. (2001) Disciplinary Differences and University Teaching, Studies in Higher Education, 26/2  pp 135 -146

NATIONAL COMMITTEE OF INQUIRY INTO HIGHER EDUCATION (1997), Higher Education in the Learning Society  (London, HMSO)

PARKER, S. (1997) Reflective Teaching in the Postmodern World, A Manifesto for Education in Postmodernity (Buckingham, Open University Press)

PLANNING GROUP FOR ACCREDITATION AND TEACHING IN HIGHER  (1998), Accreditation and Teaching in Higher Education [Booth Report]


QUALITY ASSURANCE AGENCY (QAA) (2001) The Framework for National Qualifications in England, Wales and Northern Ireland    HYPERLINK "http://www.qaa.ac.uk/crntwork/nqf/ewni2001/contents.htm" http://www.qaa.ac.uk/crntwork/nqf/ewni2001/contents.htm

SAUNDERS, M. (1986) The Innovation Enclave, Unintended Effects of TVEI Implementation in Training Agency (MSC), TVEI Working Paper 1 (University of East Anglia, Centre for Applied Research in Education)

SAUNDERS, M. (1988) Enclaves in British Schools, TVEI Implications, in J. Lauglo  & S, Lillis (Eds) Vocationalising Education (Pergamon)

SAUNDERS, M.  (1990) Control & Influence: Recent Government Policy on Technical and Vocational Education in British Education in Summerfield, P. & Evans, E. (eds) Technical Education and the State since 1850 (Manchester University Press) pp 171-189

 SAUNDERS, M. & MACHELL, J. (2000) Understanding emerging trends in Higher Education curricula and work connections, Higher Education Policy, 13,  pp 287-302

SCHÖN, D. A. (1983) The Reflective Practitioner  (San Francisco, Jossey-Bass)

SCHÖN, D. A. (1987) Educating the Reflective Practitioner (San Francisco, Jossey-Bass)

TIRRI, K., HUSU, J., KANSANEN, P. (1999) The epistemological stance between the knower and the known, Teaching and Teacher Education, 15, pp 911-922

TROWLER, P. (1998) Academics Responding to Change: New Higher Education Frameworks and Academic Cultures (SRHE & Open University Press)

TROWLER, P. & COOPER, A. (2002) Teaching and Learning Regimes, implicit theories and recurrent practices in the enhancement of teaching and learning through educational development programmes. Higher Education Research and Development, 21, 3, 221-240

WENGER, E. (1998) Communities of Practice, Learning, Meaning and Identity (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press)

WERTSCH, J. V.(1998) Mind as Action (Oxford, Oxford University Press)


WORDCOUNT: 7101 words











PAGE  


PAGE  1




