                                                     Professor Simon Baron-Cohen, FBA, FMedSci, Kt
                                                     Director, Autism Research Centre
                                                     Psychiatry Department, University of Cambridge
                                                     www.autismresearchcentre.com




                               Values, Outcomes, and Inclusive
                             Community Engagement with Students

                                        Consent Form
Principal Investigator                               Corresponding Co-Investigator
Professor Sir Simon Baron-Cohen                      Dr Kevin Matlock

Please read the following points before deciding whether you would like to take part in the study:

  ▪   I have read and understand the participant information sheet. I have also had the opportunity to
      consider the information given, ask questions using the contact details provided, and (if
      applicable) have had these answered satisfactorily.

  ▪   I understand my participation is voluntary and I am free to withdraw at any point, without giving
      a reason.

  ▪   I understand who will have access to the personal data I provide, and how the data will be stored.

  ▪   I understand all personal information will remain confidential and all efforts will be made to
      ensure that I cannot be publicly identified (except as required by law).

  ▪   I understand de-identified data may be shared with third parties for research purposes, such as
      collaborators at other universities, including those outside the UK. All partnerships are carefully
      reviewed by the research team and are conducted in line with University of Cambridge data
      protection policies.

  ▪   If I attend a focus group or interview, I consent to have audio and video recordings made. I
      understand these recordings will be used for analysis purposes only and will not be shared outside
      the research team. I also understand I will have the option to turn off my camera at any point
      should I so choose.

  ▪   I agree to allow quotations to be used in research outputs on the understanding that these quotes
      will not be identifiable.

Do you agree to the terms above and agree to take part in the study?               □ Yes

Please select "Continue" to proceed to the survey.


                                                                                                May 2026
