Report received by the Council of the University of Cambridge on 24 November 2025




Annual research integrity report to Council
2024-25

Section 1. Key Contact Information

 1A Key Contact information


 Name of organisation                        University of Cambridge


 Type of organisation                        Higher education institution

 Date statement approved by governing body
                                             24/11/2025
 (DD/MM/YY)

 Web address of University’s research
                                             https://www.research-integrity.admin.cam.ac.uk/
 integrity page

                                             Name: Professor Sir John Aston, PVC-Research
 Named senior member of staff to oversee
 research integrity
                                             Email address: researchintegrity@admin.cam.ac.uk

 Named member of staff who will act as a     Name: Professor Sir John Aston, PVC-Research
 first point of contact for anyone wanting
 more information on matters of research
 integrity                                   Email address: researchintegrity@admin.cam.ac.uk
Report received by the Council of the University of Cambridge on 24 November 2025




Section 2: Promoting high standards of research integrity and
positive research culture
 2A. Description of current systems and culture
 Drawing on Commitments 1 to 4 of the Concordat, this section summarises how the University maintains and fosters
 high standards of research integrity in all aspects of research and embeds a research environment underpinned by a
 culture of integrity, good governance and support for the development of researchers.
 2.1.1 The mission of the University of Cambridge is to contribute to society through the pursuit of
 education, learning, and research at the highest international levels of excellence. The University
 recognises that the pursuit of excellent research and the fulfilment of our responsibilities to
 participants in research, research users and the wider community require the maintenance of the
 highest standards of integrity and ethics.

 2.1. Policies and Systems
 2.1.2 The following structure has been put in place to facilitate and maintain a research
 environment that develops good research practice and nurture a culture of research integrity:
     a) The Pro-Vice-Chancellor for Research (PVC-R) is the senior academic lead on research
         integrity matters within the University and Chair of the Research Policy Committee.
     b) University Research Ethics Committee (UREC) is the overarching Committee at the
         University for the consideration of ethical issues arising from research that involves human
         participants and personal data. It also advises the PVC-R on the development and
         implementation of policy and procedures relating to research integrity.
     c) The Head of Policy, Governance and Integrity (HPGI) is the University Research Governance
         and Integrity Officer. The HPGI, who is supported by a Senior Research Governance and
         Ethics Coordinator (SRGEC) and two Research Integrity and Governance Coordinators
         (RIGCs), is responsible for fostering a culture of research integrity across the institution,
         including:
             o supporting the PVC-R, Head of the Research Office and UREC to oversee the
                  University’s research ethics and governance systems,
             o supporting the implementation of the University’s Procedure for the Investigation
                  of an Allegation of Research Misconduct.
             o working with stakeholders from across the University and outside Cambridge to
                  support research integrity and good research practice
     d) The Animal Welfare and Ethical Review Body (AWERB) oversees the management of
         governance and develops and implements policies relating to animal welfare at the
         University.
     e) Heads of Department and Faculty are responsible for research integrity and ethics matters
         in their institution, including the implementation of the University’s research ethics and
         integrity policies and procedures at a local level and taking initial responsibility for actions
         under the Misconduct in Research policy.
     f) The Head of Research Culture is responsible for driving the research culture agenda in the
         University, including supporting Research Culture Steering Committee in setting the
         strategy and establishing institutional priorities for research culture.
Report received by the Council of the University of Cambridge on 24 November 2025


     g) The Office of Scholarly Communications (OSC) is responsible for promoting and supporting
        Open Research at the University, including assisting researchers in making their
        publications and data open, and providing advice and training.

 2.1.3 In addition, under Commitments 2 and 3 of the Concordat, the University is required to have
 clear policies and procedures to ensure that research is conducted to the highest levels of ethics
 and integrity. This includes:
     a) Statement on Research Integrity
     b) Guidelines on Good Research Practice & Checklist
     c) Research Ethics Policies
     d) Procedure for the Investigation of an Allegation of Research Misconduct (see section 3)
     e) Research Data Management Policy Framework:

 2.1.4 The University’s Statement on Research Integrity, which sets out the high-level standards
 and principles of research integrity that all those engaged in research at the University are
 expected to follow, serves as an over-arching framework that guides the research integrity at the
 University.

 2.1.5 The University’s Guidelines on Good Research Practice provides a detailed introduction to
 good research practice at Cambridge and highlights links to further guidance on key issues. It
 supports researchers to determine how to apply the baseline standards set by ordinances and
 regulations of the University, the Research Integrity Statement and wider legal and contractual
 requirements and ethical norms, to the concrete situations which face them in everyday practice
 of research.

 2.1.6 The purpose of the accompanying Research Integrity and Good Research Practice Checklist is
 to help supervisors provide research students with an introduction to issues of research integrity
 and encourage broader dialogue about good research practice

 2.1.7 The University policies on research ethics provide a framework to ensure that all research
 involving i) human participants and personal data or ii) animals is conducted in accordance with
 fundamental ethical principles.

 2.1.8 Information about University research-related policies and procedures is publicly available
 on the University research integrity webpage and also disseminated to research staff and students
 through Departments and Faculties as detailed in 2.2.

 2.1.9 In line with Commitment 5 of the Concordat, these policies are reviewed on a regular basis in
 light of experience and sectoral updates to ensure they are aligned to evolving expectations of
 best practice. The periodic review of relevant policies is detailed in the table below:

  Policy                                                   Date of last approval/   Next review
                                                           review
  Statement on Research Integrity                          2020-21                  Every 5 years
                                                           Ongoing
  Guidelines on Good Research Practice & Checklist         Ongoing                  2026-27
Report received by the Council of the University of Cambridge on 24 November 2025



  Research Data Management Policy Framework                2021                     2026

  Research Ethics Policy [Human Participants &             2020-21                  Ongoing
  Personal data]
  Research Ethics Policy [Animal Welfare]                  2023-2024                Every 3 years
  Procedure for the Investigation of an Allegation of      2023-2024                2026-27
  Research Misconduct
  Conflict of Interest Policy                              2021                     Every 5 years
  University’s Open Research Position Statement            2025                     Every 2 years

 2.1.10 The University is committed to the continuing and ongoing improvement of its processes
 for supporting and strengthening the understanding of research integrity at Cambridge. Key
 actions taken during 2024-2025 to support research integrity are reported in section 2B below.

 2.2. Communications and Engagement
 2.2.1 Effective communication and engagement underpin the University’s efforts to foster an
 environment where research is conducted in accordance with good research practice and to
 ensure that all those involved in research are made aware of these guidelines and related policies
 and guidelines.

 2.2.2 Research-related policies are made available to staff through the University research
 integrity website. The research integrity website, which is regularly updated by the RGI team,
 serves as communications and engagement hub for anyone seeking information on research
 integrity matters at Cambridge:
     a) Providing details of the training programme on research integrity to research staff and
         students, including introductory self-paced courses and workshops for researchers at
         different career stages.
     b) sharing guidance relating to good research practice and research integrity
     c) setting out University policies and regulations that relate to research integrity and
         misconduct matters (listed in 2.1.3 and 3.1.5)
     d) offering sources of support, advice and guidance for researchers in need of assistance in
         relation to:
             ο conducting ethical research (see research ethics webpages),
             ο legal and professional obligations (see research governance pages)
             ο Links to external sources of support and guidance on research ethics and integrity
             ο the best practice in research, particularly
                       Research integrity guidance webpages,
                       Guidelines on Good Research Practice and checklist,
                       Research integrity advisory panel
     e) signposting to key internal contact points for matters relating to research integrity, ethics
         and governance including:
             ο The Pro-Vice-Chancellor for Research, Professor John Aston, who is the first point
                 of contact for anyone with comments, concerns or questions regarding research
                 integrity at Cambridge
             ο Research Integrity Advisory Panel
             ο Data Champions programme
Report received by the Council of the University of Cambridge on 24 November 2025


            ο School and Departmental Ethics committees
            ο The Central research Office research governance and integrity team and Clinical
              School’s Research Governance Team who support researchers to understand and
              meet expected standards of research ethics and integrity, as well as legal,
              professional, regulatory and funder obligations
            ο The research data management facility

 2.2.3 In addition, information about the University’s research-related policies and procedures is
 disseminated to research staff and students through several other mechanisms to target
 researchers at all career stages and various contracts:
     a) Research students – the Code of Practice sets out the responsibility of the research
         supervisor to make the student aware of the University’s expectations in respect of
         research integrity and good practice university guidance and links to the Research Integrity
         (RI) website
     b) Postdocs – all expected to attend a central induction Central induction run by the
         University’s Postdoc Academy. Since 2024, new postdoctoral researchers are provided with
         a new starter guide that highlights supports, services and policies
     c) Visiting Staff and students – the Standard Terms and Conditions and Visitor’s letter links to
         the good research practice guidelines that details University’s expectations and links to the
         relevant guidance and policies
     d) Academics – Online self-directed academic induction resources and PI Development
         Programme set out the university policies and links to the RI website

 2.2.4 Since 2015, departments and faculties have been expected to integrate the Concordat and
 all relevant University statements and policies, into faculty or department inductions for new
 academic staff and PhD students.

 2.2.5 Mentoring plays a key role in building awareness and understanding of policies and
 procedures at Cambridge (addressed below)


 2.3. Culture, Development and Leadership
 2.3.1 The University offers many courses to enable students and new researchers to understand
 and adopt best practice in research as quickly as possible. Lists of courses are available on the
 Personal and Professional Development web site and relevant courses are increasingly available as
 part of the University's teaching.

 2.3.2 In addition, there are specific researcher development programmes including:
     a) Postgraduate researcher development
     b) Postdoctoral Academy RD Programme
     c) Technicians’ development

 2.3.3 As a founding signatory to the National Technician Commitment, the University is committed
 to the development of technicians. This forms part of the University’s broader research culture
 framework to ensure that all members of the research community, including technicians, are
 supported and appropriately acknowledged within the research environment.
Report received by the Council of the University of Cambridge on 24 November 2025


 2.3.4 A bespoke Cambridge online introductory research integrity module, which is provided in
 three variations to account for disciplinary variations, provides an overview of the principles,
 responsibilities and importance of research integrity. The training is not intended to cover every
 aspect of Research Integrity or replace discipline-specific training and development.

 2.3.5 As a follow up offering from this module, the RGI team delivers several in-person or live
 online workshops each academic year to facilitate further discussion of the topics introduced in
 the online course. The University has also implemented the UKRIO Research Integrity online
 training and made this available to anyone conducting or managing research, including early
 career researchers, group leaders, and support staff.

 2.3.6 In addition, there is a complementary University online training module on Responsible
 Research and Innovation. The course has been made available to all researchers on the Research
 Integrity website.

 2.3.7 In addition to central research integrity training, many of the University’s departments and
 Schools offer subject-specific training in research integrity issues. The approach taken to this
 varies locally: it includes training that has been integrated into Departmental research skills
 courses; stand-alone lectures or workshops; School-level support, such as research ethics training
 offered by the Social Sciences’ Research Methods Centre; and courses arranged with external
 providers.

 2.3.8 Centrally, the University offers a range of support, training provisions and initiatives to
 support awareness and good practice in relation to equality, and inclusion including:
     a) Online training modules for staff:
            o Equality and Diversity Essentials
            o Understanding Unconscious / Implicit Bias
     b) Bespoke Training provided by ED&I team upon request
     c) Staff and student Diversity Networks supported the University Equality Champions
     d) the ED&I team co-ordinate a range of diversity events to celebrate Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual,
        Transgender, Queer+ (LGBTQ+) History Month, Black History Month, International
        Women's Day etc.

 2.3.9 The identification of training and development requirements are important components of
 the Staff Review and Development (SRD) scheme for staff, including research staff at all career
 stages and contracts. Postgraduate research students are expected to complete a self-evaluation
 report and receive advice from their supervisor on planning personal skills development.

 2.3.10 The University formally requires that all its institutions make arrangements for the
 mentoring of newly appointed staff and runs schemes for peer and developmental mentoring.

 2.3.11 The University provides the following resources to support the appropriate training and
 direction and supervision of researchers:
     a) Training in supervisory skills as part of the University's overall staff development
         programme
     b) guidance for supervisors and
     c) the Code of Practice for Research Students clearly sets out supervisor responsibilities
Report received by the Council of the University of Cambridge on 24 November 2025




 2.3.12 Supervisors are expected to encourage students and colleagues to attend relevant courses
 as part of their overall career development.

 2.4 Monitoring and reporting
 2.4.1 The HPGI is tasked with ensuring that systems, practices and processes across the University
 are periodically reviewed so that they remain fit for purpose and reflect best practice in research
 integrity and advises the Pro-Vice-Chancellor for Research on any changes that are needed.

 Research Ethics
 2.4.2 The University Research Ethics Committee, which oversees the University’s ethical review
 system (excluding animal research), undertakes periodic review, monitoring and processes
 improvement of the research ethics framework in order to maintain and strengthen the research
 ethics polices, guidance and systems.

 2.4.3 The UREC reviews the University-wide Ethics Policy every three years in light of experience,
 taking into consideration evolving ethical practice, sectoral updates and annual reports submitted
 by the local ethics committees.

 2.4.4 Local ethics committees submit an annual report to the UREC, which include summary data
 on the projects reviewed (number, discipline/ type, outcome of review process) and information
 on any strengths, issues or trends identified), to facilitate the UREC to identify and highlight good
 practice in research ethics to departments and Schools.

 2.4.5 Following ongoing discussion regarding the ethical consideration of research projects
 involving harm to the environment and cultural objects requirement set out in the 2019
 Concordat, the UREC agreed to establish a sub-committee to review and advise the UREC on the
 existing mechanism and guidance in place across the University in order facilitate UREC to further
 consider its remit and this will be established in 2025-2026.

 Research Misconduct
 2.4.6 As set out in 3.3, anonymised learning points from completed research misconduct
 investigations are made available to relevant institutional bodies (RPC, PVC-R) and, as appropriate,
 have been included in training for research staff and students.

 2.4.7 Guidance for Departments on the informal handling of concerns relating to research practice
 remains under development.
2B. Changes and developments during the period under review
Drawing on Commitment 2, and 3 of the Concordat, this section provides an update on the changes that were made
(or ongoing) since the previous annual report to ensure that research is conducted according to appropriate ethical,
legal and professional frameworks, obligations and standards and to embed and support a research environment that
is underpinned by a culture of integrity, good governance and best practice.
Policies, Practices and Procedures
2.5.1 Fair Attribution and Publishing for Technicians Policy and Guidance, including the development and deliverance
of training. This guidance has been co-developed with Russell Wilson and John Nicolson. The training was created with
support of University library staff Lucy Woolhouse and Frances Marsh. The University is a signatory of the Concordat
to Support the Development of Researchers and is working to embed sector-wide best practice using CRediT
(Contributor role taxonomy)

2.5.2 The University of Cambridge joined the UK Reproducibility Network (UKRN) in January 2025 and appointed an
Institutional and Local lead.

Training, Communications and Engagement
2.5.3 The UREC encouraged the prioritisation of new online induction training course for new members of University
research ethics committee. This is currently in preparation, with the intention of implementing this in the 2025-26
academic year.

2.5.4 In 2023-2024, the content and structure of the research integrity website has been reviewed and updated in
order to provide a better user experience and optimise website content. Further updates were implemented in 2024-
2025.

2.5.5 Training:
     • Research Ethics Committee member induction training is under development.
     • Advanced-level Research Integrity for Group Leaders training – one session has been delivered, with more to
         be delivered in 2025/2026.
     • Research misconduct training for investigators is under development.

2.5.6 A new informal communities-building group has been established to support community-building across several
teams (e.g. Open Data, Open Research, Research Culture, Reproducibility and Research Integrity) working to promote
best practice in research. The group provides a shared structure to strengthen connections between overlapping areas
of good research practice initiatives that champion good research practices, such as the Data Champions and Research
Integrity Advisory Panel.

Culture, Development and Leadership

2.5.7 A number of research culture project and initiatives are under development, including the Fair Attribution for
technicians and the Postdoctoral mentoring scheme, detailed below.

2.5.8 Work is ongoing to deliver the priorities set out in the Action Plan for Technician development at the University,
including activities, such as the delivery of workshops on fair attribution and publishing for technicians. FAIR guidance
is currently being developed and is expected to be implemented in 2025/2026. This guidance will include reference to
the above-mentioned best practice, as well as outline how best to utilise tools like OrcID and Elements. Delivery of this
guidance is dependent on future research culture funding.

2.5.9 A new mentoring scheme for early-to-mid-career academic staff was launched in Easter term 2025 to increase
access to mentoring for academic staff as a pilot to offer additional support around professional development,
leadership skills, career confidence and wellbeing.

2.5.10 In November 2024, the University approved the implementation of new reward and promotion schemes for
academic and research staff in order to reward staff for excellence. The schemes will begin to be introduced from the
2025–26 academic year.
2.5.11 The Academic Career Pathways (Research) scheme introduced new roles and revised promotion and
contribution reward processes, and includes an explicit expectation that applicants uphold the principles of research
integrity. This approach, embedding responsible research practices into formal recognition and promotion
frameworks, aligns with best practice set out in the UUK Concordat to Support Research Integrity and builds on
existing practice in the Academic Career Pathway (Research and Teaching) 2024-2025 scheme that incorporated
research integrity into the assessment criteria.



2C. Reflections on progress and plans for future developments
In accordance with commitment 5 of the concordat to strengthen the integrity of research and to
reviewing progress regularly and openly, this section reflects on the previous year’s activity, including a review of
progress and impact of initiatives relating to activities referenced in the previous year’s statement.
Reflections on progress
2.6.1 As indicated in the previous report, the University approved and implemented a new
Procedure for the Investigation of an Allegation of Research Misconduct that applies where there
is an allegation of Research Misconduct against any person undertaking research either as a
member of staff or whilst connected to a University institution or using University facilities or
funding. This Procedure replaced the University's Misconduct in Research Policy for all allegations
received after 23 February 2024, providing clearer guidance for all involved in the process and sets
out timelines and a new appeals process. This process has now been in place for a full academic
year and has been implemented in the conduct of a dispute case, appeal as well as several
investigations, and has been proved to be fit-for-purpose.

2.6.2 Following the implementation of the new procedure, the previous prompt card for Heads of
Department, which set out initial actions upon receipt of an allegation, has been updated in
accordance with the new procedure. Initial work has been undertaken to develop role-specific
guidance and training to support individuals appointed to investigate allegations. This is detailed
below under ‘future plans’.

2.6.3 The content and structure of the Research Integrity website have been reviewed and
updated to provide a better user experience and optimise website content.

2.6.4 New training on research integrity for senior researchers (Research Integrity for group-
leaders: cultivating a culture of good research practice) was developed and the first session was
delivered in 2024-25 and received positive feedback from attendees. Further sessions will be run in
2025-2026.

2.6.5 The University Research Ethics Committee (UREC) previously prioritised the implementation
of a new online induction module for new REC members. Following a delay to incorporate the
planned revisions to the University research ethics policy into the module, the development of the
module is now being progressed as a goal for 2025–26 and is expected to be launched during the
academic year.

Future plans
2.6.6 The University fully complies with the current Concordat. Work is currently underway to fully
comply with the Revised Concordat; key future actions to reach compliance are summarised
below.
2.6.7 Future work will focus on ensuring that responsible research practice is embedded in the
following forthcoming reward and progression schemes
            o Contribution Reward Scheme (Academic and Research) and
            o Academic Career Pathways for Promotion to Grades 10 to 12
            o Academic Career Pathways for Promotion to Grades 6 to 9

2.6.8 Actions to fulfil Commitment 4 of the Concordat:
           o Revise the Research Misconduct Procedure to include Questionable Research
               Practices.
           o Develop and implement new Investigator training and resources for individuals
               appointed to investigate allegations raised under the new Procedure for the
               Investigation of an Allegation of Research Misconduct
           o Prepare new guidance for Departments on the informal handling of concerns
               relating to research practice for consideration by University Committees.

2.6.9The REC induction module is being developed and is expected to be launched during the
2025-2026 academic year.




Section 3: Addressing research misconduct

3A. Statement on processes that the University has in place for dealing with allegations of misconduct
Drawing on Commitment 4 of the Concordat, this section provides a brief summary of the relevant University policies/
processes for handling allegations of research misconduct, information on how the University creates and embeds a
research environment in which all staff, researchers and students feel comfortable to report instances of misconduct
and shares anonymised key lessons learned from investigations into allegations of misconduct.
3.1 Summary of relevant organisation policies/ processes
3.1.1 As required under Commitment 4 of the Concordat, the University Procedure for the
Investigation of an Allegation of Research Misconduct sets out a transparent, robust, confidential
and fair process for dealing with allegations of research misconduct. The procedure provides a
clear definition of research misconduct and the responsibility of members to report incidents of
misconduct, whether these have been witnessed or are suspected.

3.1.2 The investigation procedure sets out a thorough three stage process for the handling of
allegations through which allegations are investigated by individuals with appropriate authority,
qualifications and experience and no conflict of interest in the case. The procedure is clearly linked
to disciplinary procedures to ensure that appropriate action can be taken when concerns are
upheld. The procedure also ensures that allegations are investigated in an appropriately
confidential manner.

3.1.3 Individuals seeking advice on the University’s misconduct procedure are able to contact the
PVC-R, the Academic Secretary, the central research governance and integrity team, their Head of
Institution and/or the relevant HR Advisor for the institution concerned.

3.1.4 The Procedure for the Investigation of an Allegation of Research Misconduct, which was
implemented in February 2024 and replaced the previous Misconduct in Research Policy, will be
periodically reviewed in line with sectoral developments to ensure that this continues to be fit for
purpose.

3.2 Creating and embedding a research environment in which individuals feel comfortable to
report instances of misconduct.
3.2.1 The University recognises that it can be difficult for staff and students to report instances of
research misconduct and has established a number of mechanisms providing support to
researchers in need of assistance via policies, practices and procedures to support researchers
including:
    a) Procedure for the Investigation of an Allegation of Research Misconduct
    b) Whistleblowing’ Policy
    c) Animal Whistleblowing Policy
    d) Dignity at Work Policy [Bullying and Harassment Policy and procedure]
    e) Policy Against Bribery and Corruption
    f) Student Complaints Procedure

3.2.2 The Procedure for the Investigation of an Allegation of Research Misconduct, including
details of the relevant contacts, is highlighted on the University research integrity website, as part
of research integrity training, within the Good Research Practice Guidelines and accompanying
checklist and the University Research Integrity Statement.

3.2.3 In addition, advice and guidance is available from the following:
    • The Research Governance and Integrity Team offers confidential advice for those
        considering raising concerns.
    • The Research Integrity Advisory Panel can provide confidential (in this case discipline
        specific) advice for those with questions regarding research integrity or considering raising
        concerns.
    • The Pro-Vice-Chancellor for Research, Professor Sir John Aston, is the first point of contact
        for anyone with comments, concerns or questions regarding research integrity at
        Cambridge and can be contacted through the research governance and integrity team
        using the following email address researchintegrity@admin.cam.ac.uk.


3.3. Lessons learned
3.3.1 The University recognises the value of using research misconduct investigations, particularly
any recommendations highlighted in investigation reports, as important learning opportunities.

3.3.2 To facilitate this, the Research Office submits an annual report to the Research Policy
Committee (RPC) that sets out lessons that have been learnt from research misconduct
investigations and recommends actions to be taken to address the issues identified.

3.3.3 As reported in the University’s 2023-2024 research integrity report, recent ‘lessons learnt’
reports to the RPC recommended:
    • changes to the University’s research misconduct procedure, which were implemented as
        part of the new procedure launched in February 2024.
    • the development of guidance for Departments on the informal handling of concerns
        relating to research practice. This recommendation is in the process of being implemented.
   •   a review be undertaken to ensure that researchers have appropriate facilities and guidance
       to ensure appropriate and reliable long-term storage of research data to enable
       verification of image integrity. This review has been delayed but will take place during
       2025-26.

3.3.4 The 2024-25 ‘lessons learnt’ report did not make any additional recommendations for action.


3B. Information on investigations of research misconduct that have been undertaken during 2023-
2024
This section provides a high-level statement on any investigations of research misconduct
undertaken during the period under review, including preliminary investigations.

Type of Allegation            Stage Reached                  Investigation Result
Plagiarism                    Formal Investigation           Upheld (Reported as ongoing in
                                                             2023-24)
Plagiarism                    Formal Investigation           Ongoing (Reported as ongoing in
                                                             2023-24)
Plagiarism                    Formal Investigation           Ongoing (Reported as ongoing in
                                                             2023-24)
Falsification / Fabrication   Preliminary Investigation      Not Upheld
Improper Dealing with         Preliminary Investigation      Not Upheld
Allegations of Research
Misconduct
Misrepresentation             Preliminary Investigation      Not Upheld
Plagiarism and Improper       Preliminary Investigation      Ongoing
Dealing with Allegations of
Research Misconduct
Falsification / Fabrication   Preliminary Investigation      Ongoing
