London Book Fair
     2026




                   1
Contents
S&S Nonfiction       4
S&S Fiction          60
Summit               74
37 Ink               78

Our partner agents   87
3
    NONFICTION




4
POLAR WAR                                                                                      January 2026

 Submarines, Spies, and the Struggle for Power
 in a Melting Arctic                                                                         Geopolitics
 Kenneth R. Rosen


A gripping blend of travelogue and frontline reporting that
reveals how climate change, military ambition, and economic
opportunity are transforming the Arctic into the epicenter of a
new cold war, where a struggle for dominance between the
planet’s great powers heralds the next global conflict.

In Polar War, Kenneth R. Rosen takes readers on an extraordinary
journey across the changing face of the far north. Through
intimate portraits of scientists, soldiers, and Indigenous
community leaders representing the interests of twenty-one
countries across four continents, he witnesses firsthand how
rising temperatures and growing tensions are reshaping life
above and below the Arctic Circle. He finds himself on the trail of
Navy SEALs training for arctic warfare, embarks on Coast Guard
patrols monitoring Russian incursions, participates in close-
quarter-combat training aboard foreign icebreakers in the Arctic
sea ice, and visits remote research stations where international
cooperation is giving way to espionage and the search for long-             Page Count: 320 pages
frozen biological weapons                                                   Territory: World
                                                                            Agent: Keith Urbahn, Javelin
Drawing on hundreds of interviews and three years of reporting
                                                                            Group
from the frontlines of climate change and great power
                                                                            Material Available:
competition, Rosen blends incisive analysis with the vivid
                                                                            Finished book
immediacy of a travelogue. The result is both an elegy for a
                                                                            Rights sold:
vanishing landscape and an urgent warning about how the race
for Arctic dominance could spark the next global conflict                   Profile Books (UK)
                                                                            Gads Forlag (Danish)
                                                                            Soshisha (Japanese) Gads Forlag
                                                                            (Norwegian)
                                                                            MT Biznes (Polish)
                                                                            La Esfera de los Libros (Spanish W)
                                                                            Nash Format (Ukrainian)
                                                                            Korean offer pending




Kenneth R. Rosen is the recipient of a Kurt Schork Award, a Bayeux-Calvados Award for War
Correspondents, and was a two-time finalist for the Livingston Award for his work in Syria and Iraq. His
writing has appeared in The New Yorker, The New York Times, The Atlantic, and WIRED.
                                                                                                              5
THE GAME CHANGER                                                                            January 2026

How Harry Reid Remade the Rules and Showed
Democrats How to Fight                                                                      Politics
Jon Ralston

How did the son of a laundress for local brothels end up one
of America’s most powerful politicians and the Senate’s most
bare-knuckled Democrat? Political journalist Jon Ralston
gives us the first full biography of Harry Reid, the five-time
Senator from Nevada whose ruthlessness and tenacity
produced the most groundbreaking legislation of the late
20th century, and who also invented the tactics that would
keep his Democratic Party in control. For that, he inspired
loyalty and derision, admiration and disdain. But his legacy of
change speaks for itself.

Born in tiny Searchlight, Nevada, Harry Reid rose from a
childhood in a ramshackle home in the middle of nowhere to
become the Democratic leader who ensured Obamacare
became law, that the nation’s banks played by the rules, and who
helped rescue the American economy by pushing through a
stimulus bill.

His political instincts were forged in the take-no-prisoners culture
of Nevada where he was once investigated by the FBI for his ties           Page Count: 400 pages
to the mob. He persuaded a Republican senator to switch parties            Territory: World
to gain partisan control, and he changed the Senate filibuster             Agent: Keith Urbahn and
rules to save President Obama’s lower court nominees. That                 Matt Latimer, Javelin Group
maneuver later helped Republicans to cement the appointments               Material Available:
of three Supreme Court justices. Reid also became a formidable             Finished book
force in Nevada, building a political machine that turned a red
state blue and left an unmatched legacy on infrastructure and the
environment—including squelching a planned nuclear waste
dump.

In The Game Changer, Ralston shows the endurance of his
accomplishments, but also his role in the enduring dysfunction of
what was once called the world’s greatest deliberative body. It is
a complicated portrait of a man who would not be denied.




Jon Ralston is the founder and CEO of The Nevada Independent. He has been covering politics in
Nevada for more than thirty-five years and has been a columnist at the Las Vegas Review-Journal, Las
Vegas Sun. He has hosted several TV programs over the years, including Ralston Live on Vegas PBS and
Ralston Reports on KSNV News 3. In 2012, Politico named Ralston one of the Top 50 “Politicos to Watch.”
He frequently appears on MSNBC, and he has also appeared on NBC’s long-running Meet the Press.
                                                                                                          6
HOW GREAT IDEAS HAPPEN                                                                       January 2026

 The Hidden Steps Behind Breakthrough Success
                                                                                              Big Ideas
 George E. Newman


Great ideas are all around us, waiting to be discovered. Here’s
how to find them.

We’re used to imagining creativity as a lightbulb moment—
sudden, mysterious, reserved for the gifted few. But what if ideas
aren’t conjured from thin air? What if they’re discovered—more
like precious artifacts that we unearth and refine?

In How Great Ideas Happen, cognitive scientist George Newman
draws on cutting-edge research to show that creativity isn’t
magic, it’s method. The most successful innovators don’t wait to
be struck by brilliance; their creative process is more like
archeology. As keen-eyed explorers, they scan the terrain, dig
with intention, and, with a little luck, find gold.

With vivid examples from the arts, science, and business,
Newman shows how creativity often comes from discovering
what was already there. For example, how Jackson Pollock
tapped into deep patterns in nature to create his famous “drip”            Page Count: 304 pages
paintings; how Korean filmmakers created an entirely new genre             Territory: World
by closely studying foreign films; or, how Paul Simon made                 Agent: Alison MacKeen &
Graceland by carefully sifting through previously recorded                 Alexis Burgess/Park & Fine
material for what he could take away.                                      Literary and Media
                                                                           Material Available:
By revealing the hidden steps behind breakthrough success, How             Finished book
Great Ideas Happen uncovers a repeatable method that anyone                Rights sold:
can follow, reframing creativity not as a rare gift, but as a              John Murray (UK)
universal capacity waiting to be unlocked through exploration.             Editora Sextante (Brazilian
                                                                           Portuguese)
                                                                           Citic Press(Chinese Simplified)
                                                                           HAUM (Korean)
                                                                           Primero Sueño Press (Spanish)




George E. Newman is an associate professor at the Rotman School of Management at the University of
Toronto and a leading expert on creativity. His research has been featured in The New York Times, The
Economist, BBC, Scientific American, Forbes, The Wall Street Journal, and The Washington Post.
                                                                                                             7
BLACK DAHLIA                                                                               January 2026

Murder, Monsters, and Madness in Midcentury America
                                                                                          True Crime
William J. Mann

Illuminating and captivating, New York Times bestselling
author of Tinseltown and Bogart offers the first definitive
account of the Black Dahlia murder—the most famous
unsolved true crime case in American history—which
humanizes the victim and situates the notorious case within
an anxious, postwar country grappling with new ideas,
demographics, and technologies.

The brutal murder of Elizabeth Short—better known as the Black
Dahlia—in 1947 has been in the public consciousness for nearly
eighty years, yet no serious study of the crime has ever been
published. Short has been mischaracterized as a wayward sex
worker or vagabond, and, like the seductive femme fatales of film
noir, responsible for and perhaps deserving of her fate. Mann
reveals her as a young woman with curiosity and drive, who
leveraged what little agency postwar society gave her to explore
the world, defying increasingly draconian postwar gender
expectations to settle down, marry, and have children. It’s time to
take a new look at the woman behind the Black Dahlia epithet.
                                                                           Page Count: 464 pages
Using a 21st-century lens, bestselling crime writer and Hollywood          Territory: World
biographer William J. Mann connects Short’s story to the anxious           Agent: Malaga Baldi, Malaga
era after World War II, when the nation was grappling with new             Baldi Literary Agency
ideas, new demographics, new technologies, and old fears                   Material Available:
dressed up as new ones.                                                    Finished book




William J. Mann is a New York Times-bestselling author of The Contender: The Story of Marlon Brando,
for which he was granted access to Brando’s private estate archive, as well as Kate: The Woman Who Was
Hepburn (named a Notable Book of the Year by the Times), and Hello Gorgeous: Becoming Barbra
Streisand.                                                                                               8
RAGE AND THE REPUBLIC                                                                        February 2026

The Unfinished Story of the American Revolution
                                                                                                Politics
 Jonathan Turley

INSTANT NEW YORK TIMES BESTSELLER

On the 250th anniversary of the Declaration of
Independence, law professor, legal analyst, and bestselling
author of The Indispensable Right Jonathan Turley explores
how the unique origins of American democracy set it apart
from other revolutions, whether it can survive and thrive in
the 21st century, and how the unfinished story of the
revolution will play out in a rapidly changing world.

This is a book about revolutions. Most countries are the progeny
of revolution. At the birth of this nation, the Founding Fathers
faced the quintessential question of self-governance: how do you
keep democracy from devolving into violent anarchy or brutal
despotism? Drawing on little-known facts from the founding,
Jonathan Turley reveals how the United States escaped the
cycles of violence and instability that plagued other democratic
movements, from ancient Athens to 19th-century France.

As the nation approaches a new era marked by artificial                      Page Count: 448 pages
intelligence, robotics, and profound economic shifts, America                Territory: World
must again withstand the pressure of radical forces that seek to             Agent: Keith Urbahn, Javelin
curtail our natural liberties under the guise of popular reform. In          Material Available:
this crisis of faith, many politicians and pundits are questioning           Finished book
the very principles of American democracy, and some law
professors are even calling for scrapping the Constitution.

Synthesizing sources from history to philosophy to the arts,
Turley offers a hopeful account of how the lessons of the past can
guide us through today’s “crisis of faith” in democracy and see us
into the future. He notes: “From redcoats to robots, our
challenges have changed. Yet, we have remained. Our greatest
danger is not forgetting the history detailed in this book, but
forgetting who we were in that history.”




Jonathan Turley is a law professor, columnist, television analyst, and litigator. He has served as counsel
in some of the most notable cases in the last two decades, including representing members of Congress,
judges, whistleblowers, five former Attorney Generals, celebrities, accused spies and terrorists,
journalists, protesters, and the workers at the secret facility Area 51.                                     9
FREEDOM LOST,                                                                               February 2026


FREEDOM                WON
A Personal History of America                                                                   History
Eugene Robinson

Pulitzer Prize-winning former Washington Post columnist
Eugene Robinson tells our nation's torturous racial history
through his own family's story, starting with his great-
grandfather's freedom from slavery and threading his way to
his own narrative and reaching today's Black Lives Matter
movement, asking whether this time will be different.

On March 27, 1829, Richard Fordham, a wealthy Charleston
planter, purchased four enslaved people from Isabella Perman—
among them a boy called Harry, journalist Eugene Robinson’s
great-great-grandfather. Renamed Henry Fordham and forced
into blacksmithing, he won his freedom a decade before the Civil
War and witnessed Union troops march into Charleston in 1865.

In Freedom Lost, Freedom Won, Robinson traces 200 years of his
family’s history, showing how African Americans have risen
toward freedom and opportunity, been pushed back by racism,
and climbed again with resilience. Blending meticulous research
with personal narrative, he offers both a searing indictment of
structural racism and a testament to the courage of those who                Page Count: 336 pages
fought to overcome it.                                                       Territory: World
                                                                             Agent: Rafe Sagalyn
                                                                             Material Available:
                                                                             Finished book




Eugene Harold Robinson is a Pulitzer Prize-winning American journalist, former columnist and associate
editor of The Washington Post, author, and political analyst. His prior positions included foreign editor,
London correspondent, and South American corresponden

                                                                                                             10
    HANNIBAL LECTER                                                                         February 2026

    A Life
                                                                                            Pop Culture
    Brian Raftery

Drawing from exclusive interviews and previously unseen
archival materials, this one-of-its-kind biography of Hannibal
Lecter documents the cannibal’s journey from terrifying villain
to unexpectedly adored antihero.

This unique biography traces the many lives and crimes of
Hannibal Lecter: his disturbing debut in Thomas Harris’s 1981
novel Red Dragon; his rise to infamy in beloved films like Michael
Mann’s Manhunter and Jonathan Demme’s Academy Award–
winning The Silence of the Lambs; and his unexpected comeback
in the cult-hit TV series Hannibal. It also dives into the untold life
and career of Harris, the secretive bestselling author whose
passion for reporting, eye for grisly detail, and connections to the
FBI helped birth not only Lecter, but also the modern true-crime
genre.

Featuring all-new interviews with crucial figures from Lecter’s
past—including actor Brian Cox, director Mann, and former FBI
special agent John Douglas—Hannibal Lecter: A Life is a deeply
reported, wildly entertaining look at the making of one of the               Page Count: 336 pages
most beloved bad guys of all time.                                           Territory: World
                                                                             Agent: Jud Laghi, The Jud
.                                                                            Laghi agency
                                                                             Material Available:
                                                                             Finished book
                                                                             Rights sold:
                                                                             Prószynski Media (Polish)
                                                                             Eksmo (Russian)




Brian Raftery’s work has appeared in such publications as The New York Times, Wired, GQ, and The
Ringer. He’s the author of Best. Movie. Year. Ever.: How 1999 Blew Up the Big Screen, and the host of
multiple podcasts for the Ringer, including the acclaimed Gene & Roger. He lives in Burbank, California,
with his wife and daughters, and will never eat meat again                                                 11
SURVIVOR: FORGED BY FIRE                                                                     February 2026




                                                                                         Pop Culture
 Jeff Probst

The official book celebrating the landmark fiftieth season
of Survivor—featuring commentary by Emmy Award–winning
host Jeff Probst and many never-before-seen images.

What’s it like to be on Survivor?

It’s a question millions of people have wondered
since Survivor debuted on CBS in the summer of 2000 and
forever changed television. What’s it like to face off in the
grueling physical challenges? To endure the unforgiving
elements of dense jungles and remote islands? To form alliances
with and conspire against fellow players? To anxiously sit at tribal
council and hear host Jeff Probst render the verdict on whether
your torch will remain lit or be extinguished?

Survivor: Forged By Fire answers these questions and more,
replicating what it feels like to play the game. Using stunning               Page Count: 288 pages
photography—many of the images never-before-seen—the book                     Territory: World
leads readers through each phase of the competition: from “The                Agent: Viacom International,
Arrival” to “The Return” and every thrilling, harrowing, and                  Inc.
inspiring moment in between. Curated by Survivor’s longtime                   Material Available:
director of photography Scott Duncan, the breathtaking                        Finished book
pictorials depict the show’s most famous players and most
memorable moments in an entirely fresh and even more candid
way. Accompanying these striking visuals are moving reflections
from Probst, who, for the first time, shares pages of diaries he
kept during filming.

This is a powerful testament to the unlimited potential that
resides within every human being—an ode to the importance of
determination, perseverance, and belief in one’s self. As Probst
writes, “Survivor isn’t just a game. It’s a journey. One that calls to
the adventurer inside us all.”




Jeff Probst is an American television presenter, producer, and author, best known for hosting the
groundbreaking reality competition series Survivor since its inception in 2000. A four-time Primetime
Emmy Award winner for Outstanding Host for a Reality or Reality -Competition Program, Probst also
serves as an executive producer on the show, contributing significantly to its enduring success and
cultural impact.
                                                                                                             12
APPLE                                                                                           March 2026

The First 50 Years
                                                                                  Business/Technology
 David Pogue

In time for Apple’s 50th anniversary, CBS Sunday Morning
correspondent David Pogue tells the iconic company’s entire
life story: how it was born, nearly died, was born again under
Steve Jobs, and became, under CEO Tim Cook, the most
valuable company in the world. The book features full-color
photos, new facts that correct the record and illuminate its
subversive culture, and fresh interviews with the legendary
figures who shaped Apple into what it is today.

On April 1, 1976, two scruffy twentysomethings, both named
Steve, founded a startup. Their goal: To bring the revolutionary
power of computers to everyone.

Over the next five decades, Apple reshaped the technology and
cultural landscapes, introducing the public to breakthroughs like
the mouse, laser printing, CD-ROM, WiFi, digital video, home                 Page Count: 608 pages
networking, touchscreen phones, and tablets. Jobs’s obsessive                Territory: World
eye for detail set the stage for products—Mac, iMac, iPod, iTunes,           Agent: Jim Levine, Levine
iPhone, iPad, AirPods, Apple Watch—that married advanced                     Greenberg Rostan
technology with beauty, simplicity, and fine design.                         Material Available:
                                                                             Finished book
Deeply researched and lavishly illustrated, Apple: The First 50              Rights sold:
Years includes new interviews with 150 key people who made the               Simon & Schuster UK (UK)
journey, including Steve Wozniak, John Sculley, Jony Ive, and                Commonwealth (Complex
many current designers, engineers, and executives. The book                  Chinese)
busts long-held myths; goes backstage for both the titanic                   Zhejiang People's Publishing
successes (450 million iPods, 700 million iPads, 2.2 billion                 House (Chinese Simplified)
iPhones) and the instructive failures (Lisa, Apple III, MobileMe);           Bogart Media (Georgian)
and assesses the forces that challenge Apple’s dominance as it               SangSangSquare (Korean)
                                                                             Verlag Franz Vahlen (German)
enters its second half century.
                                                                             Grupa Wydawnicza Foksal (Polish)
                                                                             Book One Editora (Portuguese
Bursting with tales of frenetic all-nighters, engineering genius,            Brazilian)
and creative rebellion, this book is a true testament to Apple’s             Eksmo (Russian)
unique and innovative vision, and a must read for anyone whose               Nha Nam (Vietnamese)
life Apple has touched..


David Pogue is a seven-time Emmy Award winner for his stories on CBS Sunday Morning, a five-time
TED speaker, host of twenty NOVA specials on PBS, and a New York Times bestselling author. He’s
written about Apple for his entire career, including thirteen years as a Macworld columnist, thirteen more
as tech columnist for The New York Times, and twenty years as the #1 bestselling author of books about
Macs and iPhones.
                                                                                                                13
STORY OF US                                                                                     April 2026

How the Taylor Swift Fandom Changed Our Lives
                                                                                          Pop Culture
 Olivia Levin

We’ve had the time of our lives as Swifties, and now that
story—full of joy, friendship, connection, clowning, and
singing at the top of our lungs—is documented in this tribute
to the fandom and the reason we’re all here, Taylor Swift.

We all know how it started: a teenage girl from Pennsylvania
moved to Nashville and rose to the top of the country charts.
That’s when Taylor Swift’s story began—and when ours, as
Swifties, did too.

The Story of Us is a heartfelt chronicle of the fandom’s evolution,
from calling in requests for “Tim McGraw” to unforgettable
Tumblr interactions, friendship bracelets, livestream marathons,
and even the Ticketmaster war.

More than anything, it’s about how Taylor’s lyrics became our
stories, binding millions of fans into a community like no other.
Written by a Swiftie, for Swifties, this love letter celebrates the
memories, lessons, and unbreakable bonds of a fandom that has
stood the test of time.                                                     Page Count: 256 pages
                                                                            Territory: World
This passionate and unique fandom has won awards and been                   Agent: Larry Weissman and
intensely studied, but for the first time, fans can reminisce and           Sascha Alper, Brooklyn
celebrate what it means to be part of this life-changing                    Literary
community. A love letter written by a Swiftie, for Swifties, The            Material Available:
Story of Us ensures that our story will never be forgotten.                 Manuscript
                                                                            Rights sold:
                                                                            Primero Sueño Press (Spanish)




Olivia Levin has run the @SwiftiesForEternity account since she was thirteen and has become the go -to
source for Taylor Swift fans everywhere. Recognized by USA TODAY as one of the biggest Taylor Swift
social media influencers, Olivia lives in Nashville, Tennessee, where she continues to share updates,
foster community, and bring Swifties together across the globe.                                             14
I HOPE YOU ELOPE                                                                                     April 2026

A Bridesmaid Survival Guide
                                                                                               Self-help
 Ruhama Wolle

The first survival guide for bridesmaids to protect their sanity
and their wallets—and a call to reimagine the role.

If you’re holding this book, chances are you’ve been a
bridesmaid, and you’re gearing up for another battle but this
time with more clarity and boundaries. Maybe it’s your first
rodeo. Or maybe you’re tired of the emotional fine print that
comes with saying yes, and you want to say no without losing the
friendship. Wherever you are, you’re not alone.

You’ve RSVP’d, Venmo’d blindly, and smiled through a dress
fitting that cost more than a month’s worth of therapy. You’ve
shown up with your lashes glued on, while finding yourself
stretched thinner than the patience of a bride on her third dress
fitting. The truth is, it’s never just “one day.” It’s a year of
emotional endurance, financial acrobatics, and the subtle art of
not losing your mind while holding someone else’s bouquet.
Women are losing their sanity, their wallets, their friendships, and
themselves.
                                                                             Page Count: 224 pages
The first of its kind, I Hope You Elope is a survival guide by               Territory: World
someone who’s been in the group chat, worn the dress, and                    Agent: Jessica Spitz, Janklow
swallowed the resentment. Funny, brutally honest, and                        & Nesbit Associates
heartbreakingly familiar, it’s the bridesmaid manifesto we’ve                Material Available:
been waiting for—not to tear down the dream, but to protect the              Manuscript
women holding it up. This step-by-step playbook will help you
navigate tough conversations, set boundaries without guilt, and
figure out if that destination bachelorette trip is really in your
budget. Equal parts reality check and rallying cry, it gives
bridesmaids the tools, language, and permission to show up for
their friends without disappearing within themselves.




Ruhama Wolle is the style partnerships editor at The Cut. She currently resides in New York City.,



                                                                                                             15
BACKTALKER                                                                                            May 2026

An American Memoir
                                                                                                   Memoir
Kimberlé Williams Crenshaw

One of the most influential public intellectuals in the world
and the architect of the two biggest ideas to reshape the
American conversation about fairness offers the intimate story
of how her life gave birth to these ideas.

It is not very often that someone comes along and permanently
reshapes the way Americans think about two of the most
important issues of the day. In this case: race and gender. But
that is what Kimberlé Crenshaw did when she articulated two
concepts that would forever change national and global debates
about equality: intersectionality and critical race theory.

Backtalker is the powerful and intimate story of how a little girl
from Canton, Ohio, came up with a new way to look at the world.
Crenshaw’s memoir traces the way her lived experience made
her see things others didn’t as the daughter of a strong-minded
teacher and a pathbreaking public servant, and as the sister of a
protective, yet bullying older brother. She starts to talk back, and
that backtalking has continued throughout her life. It happens
when she is denied a role in the kindergarten school play. When                 Page Count: 400 pages
she is escorted to the back door of a private club. When Anita Hill             Territory: World
is exiled for testifying against Clarence Thomas. When OJ                       Agent: Nate Muscato and
Simpson goes on trial. When Obama launches My Brother’s                         David Kuhn, Aevitas Creative
Keeper, a movement focused on boys of color only. When the                      Management
movement against police violence overlooks Black women.                         Material Available:
Crenshaw is there for all of it.                                                Manuscript
                                                                                Rights Sold:
                                                                                Penguin Random House UK (UK)
                                                                                Compahia das Letras (Portuguese
                                                                                Brazilian)




 Kimberlé W. Crenshaw is a pioneering scholar and writer on civil rights, Black feminist legal theory,
 race, racism, and the law. She was a founder and has been a leader in the intellectual movement called
 Critical Race Theory and is also known for introducing and developing the concept of intersectionality.
 She is a Distinguished Professor of Law at the University of California, Los Angeles, the Isidor and Seville
 Sulzbacher Professor of Law at Columbia Law School, and the cofounder and Executive Director of the
 African American Policy Forum. Crenshaw writes regularly for The New Republic, The Nation, and Ms.,
 hosts the podcast Intersectionality Matters!, and has appeared as a commentator on media outlets
 including MSNBC and NPR.

                                                                                                                  16
AI FOR GOOD                                                                                      May 2026

How Real People Are Using Artificial Intelligence to Fix
Things That Matter                                                                          Technology
 Josh Tyrangiel

In contrast to the wave of noisy polemics around AI, AI For
Good explores how, in practice, it can actually improve our
lives and tells the stories of everyday citizens at the forefront
of this new “AI entrepreneurship.”

AI is often framed as a force of radical transformation, either
catapulting us into a utopian future or dragging us toward
existential ruin. But this book tells a different story. It’s not about
high-profile tech CEOs who want to use AI to “break shit,” but
about a bunch of smart pragmatists using AI to make the world
better.

Josh Tyrangiel’s journey into AI began with a late-night YouTube
video featuring General Gustave Perna, the retired four-star
general who orchestrated the distribution of Covid vaccines
during Operation Warp Speed. Perna’s success—and the end of
the pandemic—depended on AI’s practical ability to synthesize
and standardize vast amounts of logistical data. AI wasn’t the
hero of the story—it was the tool that helped real people get               Page Count: 272 pages
things done.                                                                Territory: World
                                                                            Agent: Amanda Urban,
This book follows those people, who make up a kind of AI                    Creative Artists Agency
counterculture. It explores AI’s quiet revolution in government             Material Available:
services, medicine, education, and human connection—places                  Manuscript
where it’s being used to amplify human judgment rather than
replace it. It tells the stories of teachers, doctors, and bureaucrats
who often stumbled into AI as a means to solve specific, tangible
problems, often with no prior software expertise.

While the loudest voices in AI debate doomsday scenarios and
trillion-dollar market opportunities, this book focuses on those
working in the messy, incremental, but deeply impactful space of
AI practice. Change is hard. Institutions move slowly. But even in
failure there are lessons for everyone who’s interested in using
AI—carefully, thoughtfully—to build a better world today.



 Josh Tyrangiel is a writer for The Atlantic. He was previously the editor of Bloomberg Businessweek and
 chief content officer for Bloomberg Media. A twelve-time Emmy and Peabody Award–winning producer,
 he created Vice News Tonight on HBO and has produced numerous feature-length documentaries for
 HBO, Netflix, and Apple TV.

                                                                                                           17
OUR MINDS WERE ALWAYS FREE                                                                            May 2026

A History of How Black Brilliance Was Exploited—and the Fight
to Retake Control
                                                                                                   History
Lisa E. Davis

An exploration of how African American innovators and
artists—whose impact and financial value in American music,
movies, and TV is disproportionately greater than their
numbers—have fought for and often won the rights to own
and benefit from their own work.

When we think about the things that have barred success for
African Americans, intellectual property law is hardly the first
thing that comes to mind, if we even think of it all. We certainly
don’t think of it as the launching pad for building generational
wealth in the Black community, so it follows that we don’t see our
favorite pop stars as revolutionary race warriors.

African American artists have finally, belatedly, come to be the
owners of their art and beneficiaries of the money their art
makes, after centuries of producing life-changing art. There were
hundreds and thousands of Bessie Smiths before we ever got
Beyoncé or Kendrick Lamar.

Lisa E. Davis, one of the foremost African American                            Page Count: 272 pages
entertainment attorneys in the country, traces the epic journey                Territory: World in the English
Black Americans have been on, from being claimed as property                   language
to claiming the benefits of intellectual property. As she notes,               Agent: Tanya McKinnon
“Under slavery, our minds were always free, but there was no                   Material Available:
profit from what our minds created.”                                           Manuscript




Lisa E. Davis is one of the foremost entertainment attorneys in the country. She is Co-Chair of the
Entertainment Group of Frankfurt Kurnit Klein & Selz, representing celebrities in the film, television,
publishing, music, theater, and sports industries. Davis has been ranked as a New York area “Super
Lawyer” since 2007 and featured on the cover of Super Lawyers magazine about her career and
advocacy for racial justice.
                                                                                                                 18
4 DISCIPLINES OF EXECUTION FOR         May 2026


EDUCATORS                    Education/Self-help
 Sean Covey

From bestselling author Sean Covey, a revolutionary
operating system that helps educators achieve their most
wildly important goals by focusing on what matters most,
even amid the daily whirlwind of urgent demands—based on
the groundbreaking 4 Disciplines of Execution framework.

In education, setting goals is easy—but achieving them is hard. It’s
easy to understand why. Every day, educators face an
overwhelming whirlwind of urgent tasks, making it nearly
impossible to focus on long-term objectives. The 4 Disciplines of
Execution (4DX) offers a proven framework that has helped
thousands of schools worldwide break through this barrier to
achieve their most important goals.

This groundbreaking book shows educators at every level how
to:
-Focus on the one or two goals that will make the biggest
difference, using the principle of “less is more.”
-Identify and act on high-leverage activities that predictably drive
results.                                                                    Page Count: 256 pages
-Create visible, compelling score boarding that motivates                   Territory: World
students and staff.                                                         Material Available:
-Build a culture of shared accountability that gets everyone                Manuscript
engaged in the goal.                                                        Rights sold:
                                                                            Simon & Schuster (UK)
Based on timeless principles of human effectiveness and backed
by years of successful implementation in schools globally, The 4
Disciplines of Execution for Educators is an essential operating
system for any educator serious about turning their biggest goals
into reality.




Sean Covey is a business executive, author, speaker, and innovator. He is President of FranklinCovey
Education and is devoted to transforming education throughout the world through a principle-centered
leadership approach. Sean is a New York Times bestselling author and has written several books,
including the Wall Street Journal #1 business bestseller The 4 Disciplines of Execution, The 6 Most
Important Decisions You’ll Ever Make, The 7 Habits of Happy Kids, and The 7 Habits of Highly Effective
Teens, which has been translated into twenty languages and sold over 8 million copies worldwide.
                                                                                                         19
SUPERTEAMS                                                                                       June 2026

The Science and Secrets of High-Performing Teams
                                                                                              Business
 Ron Friedman

The ultimate playbook for building high-performing teams,
packed with counterintuitive insights, surprising science, and
real-world lessons from the most comprehensive study of
elite groups ever conducted.

What do the best teams do differently?

To find out, award-winning social psychologist Ron Friedman
surveyed thousands of teams and pinpointed the precise habits
that separate the best from the rest. The results upend everything
we think we know about teamwork. It turns out that the most
successful teams aren’t the ones that collaborate most, get along
best, or put in the longest hours. What really sets them apart is
the way they manage their energy and attention, bring out the
best in one another, and keep improving over time.

Blending eye-opening discoveries with unforgettable stories,
Superteams takes you inside the writers’ room of Succession and
Bridgerton, the recording studio of ABBA and Fleetwood Mac,
the kitchens of Michelin-starred restaurants, the laboratories of            Page Count: 352 pages
Nobel Prize–winning scientists, the locker rooms of NBA and NFL              Territory: World
teams, and the boardrooms of the world’s most innovative                     Agent: Lucinda Halpern,
companies.                                                                   Lucinda Literary, LLC
                                                                             Material Available:
Smart, insightful, and relentlessly practical, this is your science-         Manuscript
backed guide to turning your team into a Superteam.                          Rights sold:
                                                                             John Murray (UK)
                                                                             Fine Press (Chinese Complex)
                                                                             Cheers Publishing Company
                                                                             (Chinese Simplified)
                                                                             Matar Publishing (Hebrew)
                                                                             Primero Sueño Press (Spanish)




Ron Friedman, PhD, is an award-winning psychologist and the founder of ignite80, a learning and
development company that teaches leaders science-based strategies for building high-performing
teams. He is the author of The Best Place to Work, an Inc. Magazine Best Business Book of the Year,
and Decoding Greatness.                                                                                      20
GRANDMA JOY AND ME                                                                                 June 2026

A Journey of Healing, One National Park at a Time
                                                                                                 Memoir
 Brad Ryan

A heart-rending, transformative true story following Brad
Ryan and his grandmother Joy Ryan as they embark on a
seven-year journey to visit every national park in the United
States.

Raised in Appalachia, Grandma Joy endured a life of hardship,
while her grandson Brad struggled with family rifts and
unresolved pain. Together, they set out to visit all 63 U.S. national
parks—a seven-year journey from Denali’s peaks to the
Everglades’ otherworldly beauty. Along the way, the parks
became classrooms, teaching them lessons of resilience,
forgiveness, and love.

Grandma Joy and Me is both a travel adventure and a story of
intergenerational healing, as a young man and his 90-year-old
grandmother—the oldest person to visit every national park—
discover freedom from the struggles that long divided them and
a deeper understanding of what it means to be human.

                                                                              Page Count: 304 pages
                                                                              Territory: World
                                                                              Agent: Michael Palgon,The
                                                                              Palgon Company LLC
                                                                              Material Available:
                                                                              Manuscript
                                                                              Rights sold:
                                                                              Text Publishing (UK)




Brad Ryan is a veterinarian, wildlife conservationist, social media influencer, mental health advocate, and
writer from Southeastern Ohio. He earned his BA from Miami University, an MSC in mammalian biology
from the University of Pretoria, and both a DVM and MPH from The Ohio State University, specializing in
wildlife medicine and veterinary public health.                                                               21
LIFEGUARD                                                                                  June 2026

A Love Story
                                                                                          Memoir
 Janet Fash

An unforgettable memoir from New York City’s first female
lifeguard chief, this coming-of-age story plunges readers into
the rough-and-tumble, sun-soaked world of Rockaway Beach
in the 1970's and 1980’s.

The first time I ever saw a lifeguard get horned was in the summer
of 1974.

So begins the singular story of Janet Fash, the first female
lifeguard chief at Rockaway Beach. Janet never expected to be a
lifeguard, but when she got recruited by a friend to join the New
York City lifeguarding corps, she never looked back. Rockaway
Beach, her first post, had it all: sun, sand, and the imperative to
be the best. After all, people's lives are on the line.

Lifeguard: A Love Story is a singular memoir about Janet’s life on
the beach and an evocative picture of how a place as special as
Rockaway Beach has changed over four decades. Yet at its most
essential, it’s a coming-of-age tale, detailing what it was like to be
a woman rising through the ranks in a male-dominated field,              Page Count: 240 pages
details of the legendary “Caveman Conventions” on the beach in           Territory: World
the 80s, an inside look at the persistent union corruption that has      Agent: Emma Dries, Triangle
plagued the corps, and a poignant through-line of grief, as the          House
stakes of the job are life and death.                                    Material Available:
                                                                         Manuscript




 Janet Fash has been a New York City lifeguard for almost forty years.

                                                                                                       22
 GOD TEST                                                                                           June 2026

Artificial Intelligence and Our Coming Cosmic Reckoning
                                                                                              Social Science
 Robert Wright

From bestselling author and Pulitzer Prize finalist Robert
Wright comes a sweeping new view of artificial intelligence—
as an evolutionary force that will pose deep political and
spiritual challenges and could, in the process, give our
species a unifying sense of purpose.

The God Test is the first book to capture the power behind the AI
revolution—to clearly explain the breakthroughs that sparked the
current wave of advance and compellingly show why this wave
will grow in magnitude and meaning. Written by one of our
foremost public intellectuals, and informed by his decades of
chronicling the digital age, the book argues that we are about to
witness the most abruptly dramatic social transformation in the
history of our species.

Wright says that to truly understand this moment in technological
history, we need to expand our perspective beyond the last
century or even the whole history of technology and look back
across billions of years of life on Earth. The advance of AI, he
argues, is driven by evolutionary dynamics like those that led to              Page Count: 304 pages
intelligent life in the first place. And understanding those                   Territory: World
dynamics can empower us to confront our climactic challenge:                   Agent: Rafe Sagalyn, Sagalyn
Can we muster the political, moral, and even spiritual resources               Material Available:
needed to guide this technology wisely?                                        Manuscript

If we fail, the consequences for the whole planet could be grave.
But if we meet the challenge—if we pass “the God test”—we can
live in a world where humanity thrives, finding not just happiness
but deeper meaning and purpose. The very machines that might
otherwise imperil or oppress us can enrich us, helping us
transcend the psychological impediments to human concord and
fulfillment.




Robert Wright is the New York Times bestselling author of The Evolution of God (a finalist for the Pulitzer
Prize), Nonzero, The Moral Animal, Three Scientists and their Gods (a finalist for the National Book Critics
Circle Award), and Why Buddhism Is True. He is the cofounder and editor-in-chief of the widely
respected Bloggingheads.tv and MeaningofLife.tv. He has written for The New Yorker, The Atlantic, The
New York Times, Time, Slate, and The New Republic.

                                                                                                               23
SUDDEN FLICKER OF LIGTH                                                                       July 2026

A Revisionist History of Movies
                                                                                           Cinema
 David Thomson

From cinema’s most distinguished historian and critic comes a
masterful one volume look at the whole sweep of movie
history—perfect for fans of iconic films and modern classics,
from Citizen Kane to Anora.

There are few greater film lovers than David Thomson who, over
the course of fifty years, has built up a reputation as one of the
wisest and most penetrating voices on the art form. But Thomson
is also very much aware of the dark side of this art that he’s
devoted his career to and here he makes a full reckoning with it.
In a very profound way, he argues in this book, the movies have
been a destructive force—responsible for creating an alternate
reality and fantasyland that has only deepened the isolation and
disconnection of our society over the course of a century.

Thomson explores the high and low points of film history with his
usual brilliant insight—sharp and arresting readings of movies
from Metropolis to Rear Window to Anora can be found in these
pages. But he also shows the ways in which our love of voyeurism
and villainy, and the passivity which the movies further engender,        Page Count: 384 pages
have led to a coarsening not just of a medium, but of the larger          Territory: World
culture, including our political life. A bracing and polemical book,      Agent: Steve Wasserman,
this is a powerful capstone to a distinguished career.                    Calligraph
                                                                          Material Available:
                                                                          Manuscript
                                                                          Rights sold:
                                                                          Penguin Random House (UK)




David Thomson is the author of more than twenty books, including biographies of David O. Selznick and
Orson Welles, and The New Biographical Dictionary of Film. His writing and his books have been
featured in the New York Times, The Guardian, the Los Angeles Times, The Atlantic, Esquire, and many
more.

                                                                                                        24
HOW THE DEMOCRATS SCREWED                                                                           July 2026


BERNIE
                                                                                               Politics
 Tad Devine

An explosive inside account of how the Democratic
establishment used every weapon in its arsenal to subvert the
will of the people and stop Bernie Sanders’s presidential bid
in 2016—told by his chief strategist who witnessed it all
firsthand.

One question haunted the American left after the 2016 election:
how could a grassroots movement that drew massive crowds and
shattered fundraising records fail? The answer exposes
fundamental flaws in American democracy itself.

In How the Democrats Screwed Bernie, Sanders’s chief strategist
in the 2016 Democratic primary unravels how the “Clinton
Machine”—a network of operatives, Super PACs, and media
allies—in consort with the Democratic National Committee
deployed dark money and dirty tricks to stop a wildly popular
outsider candidate. A candidate who may well have been the
peoples’ choice and beaten Donald Trump.

You’ll discover how deeply the entrenched Democratic                          Page Count: 256 pages
establishment orchestrated opposition research campaigns, the                 Territory: World
true story behind the voter file crisis that nearly derailed the              Agent: Jill Grinberg, Jill
campaign, and why primary rules are deliberately structured to                Grinberg Literary
favor insiders over often more compelling outsiders.                          Material Available:
                                                                              Manuscript
This isn’t just another campaign memoir. Nor is it just a reflection
on the doomed Sanders’s candidacy ten years hence. It is a
cautionary tale about a crisis in American democracy that is
becoming more urgent by the day. As voters grapple with
growing distrust of political institutions, How the Democrats
Screwed Bernie reveals how our democratic processes really
work and how they can be manipulated by those in both parties
with enough money and power to game the system.




Tad Devine is a Democratic political strategist with over thirty years of campaign experience. Prior to
serving as chief strategist for Bernie Sanders’s 2016 presidential campaign, he was a senior adviser in Al
Gore’s 2000 and John Kerry’s 2004 presidential campaigns. In addition to his political work and media
consulting, he has held academic positions at Boston University, the Harvard Kennedy School, and
George Washington University, among others.

                                                                                                             25
PARENT UNTRAPPED                                                                                   July 2026

How I Navigated Life as a Single Parent and Show
Business Mom—and Ultimately Found My True Self                                        Memoir/Celebrity
Dina Lohan

An astute and unflinching memoir, Dina Lohan peels back the
trials and tribulations of being a single mother to budding
child stars, all while facing the challenges of domestic
violence.

Born and raised in New York, Dina Lohan inherited a flair to the
theatrical—a trait she’d later pass on to her own children,
particularly Lindsay Lohan, who achieved breakout status at an
early age with her iconic performance in The Parent Trap. But
fame came with its own set of trials. Dina’s conventional vision of
motherhood was upended when her children—Lindsay, Michael,
Aliana, and Dakota—branched out into the high-stakes arenas of
acting and modeling.

Dina Lohan bravely delves into her own travails while grappling
with her twenty-year marriage to Michael Lohan, a Wall Street
gold and silver trader. She offers a brutally honest account of
motherhood under pressure of both fame and a turbulent
relationship facing collapse.
                                                                              Page Count: 288 pages
With raw and unyielding emotion, Dina Lohan’s untold story                    Territory: World
details the triumphs and struggles of being the mother of                     Agent: Scott Kaufman,
childhood fame, and the emotional toll it took to sustain her                 Buchwald Agency
children’s professional careers while being a victim of abuse. A              Material Available:
testament to courage and survival, this book provides an                      Manuscript
empowering perspective into the gritty nature of Hollywood,
domestic violence, and a mother's faith.




Dina Lohan is a TV personality who rose to fame as the mother and manager of actress Lindsay Lohan.
She is also the mother of Michael, Aliana, and Dakota Lohan. Dina gained prominence in the
entertainment and media industry by navigating the waters of all four of her children's careers. She has
also appeared in various TV shows, including starring in her own series, Living Lohan.

                                                                                                           26
HATING WOMEN                                                                                      July 2026

A Memoir of Male Rage and Recovery
                                                                                            Memoir
Sean Hotchkiss

A brutally honest confessional that reckons with the darkest
parts of the male psyche and provides a framework for men to
heal themselves and their relationships.

When Sean Hotchkiss watched his father spiral after his second
divorce and jump off a thirty-six-story bridge, the cause of his
suicide to Sean, even at twenty-two, was clear: his father couldn’t
live without a woman. And following his father’s death, Sean
vowed to never find himself in the same position. He’d never be
alone. Women became Sean’s compass. They were the way he
clocked if he was doing okay in the world: if women liked him,
desired him, wanted to sleep with him, all was well. And he dated
and slept with as many women as possible in the coming years,
running away from himself and his pain. Then, in 2015, he hit
rock bottom after another breakup. Like his father before him, he
became depressed and finally, suicidal. It was the beginning of a
decade-long odyssey towards healing.
                                                                             Page Count: 224 pages
A candid and vulnerable memoir, Hating Women is a book for
                                                                             Territory: World
men who are disappointed by dating or by relationships that
                                                                             Agent: Christopher
stagnate and sour; men who are struggling to confront their
                                                                             Combemale, Sterling Lord
demons and with the pain they’ve caused the women in their
lives. By detailing the connection between his toxic experiences             Literistic
with women and suppressed rage, Hotchkiss offers a roadmap                   Material Available:
out. What begins as confession becomes initiation: a reckoning               Manuscript
that each man must go through to reclaim a capacity for
vulnerability and live a life grounded in core values, including
loving and honoring the women in his life.




Sean Hotchkiss was a journalist for New York men’s magazines like GQ, Esquire, and Men’s Health. Since
2019, he’s been a men’s coach and facilitator dedicated to helping men live richer, more deeply fulfilling
lives: reconnecting them to their emotions, their bodies, and healing their relationships with themselves
and the people they love. Hating Women is his first book.

                                                                                                             27
SAVE A SEAT FOR ME                                                                          August 2026

 Notes on American Fatherhood
                                                                                Memoir/Parenting
 Mark Anthony Neal

From the preeminent scholar on Black masculinity in America,
Save a Seat for Me is Mark Anthony Neal's attempt to bring
his scholarship on fatherhood to a broader audience.

Save a Sear for Me embraces the nuances of how contemporary
frameworks of masculinity informed by unprecedented advances
in women and LGBTQ communities have necessitated a
reimagining of the societal expectations a father plays in the
public and private sectors of their homes.

Raised by a working-class father, during a time when American
society conceived of the role of father as protector, provider, and
disciplinarian, Neal struggles with these expectations as his
education (a doctorate's degree), profession (tenured professor
at one of the best colleges in the country), and financial position
(making more money than his father ever did) are drastically
different than that of his father. Linking his father to his own
fathering of his two daughters, one biological and another
adopted, Neal grounds his intellectual arguments about Black
fatherhood in experience and emotion makes for a vulnerable                Page Count: 256 pages
read, as well as a transformative one.                                     Territory: World
                                                                           Agent: Tanya McKinnon,
                                                                           McKinnon Literary
                                                                           Material Available:
                                                                           Manuscript Imminent (March)




Mark Anthony Neal is the Professor of Black Popular Culture in the Department of African and African -
American studies at Duke University, and one of the preeminent scholars in the country on black
masculinity, misogyny, pop culture, and how they impact Black communities in America particularly, and
what broader effects these cultural messages communicate to a broader American society..                 28
YOUR FELLOW AMERICANS                                                                            August 2026

 Dispatches from Across the Country We Call Home
                                                                                                  Memoir
 Peter Santanello

Join an adventurous and charismatic independent journalist
(perhaps you know him from YouTube) on a journey through
the very best of America, reminding us of all the reasons
we’ve got to love this place and one another.

Have you ever swapped stories on a porch with Amish snowbirds
in Florida? Searched for reindeer with the Siberian Yupik in
Alaska? Been a guest on a houseboat deep in the Louisiana
bayou?

Peter Santenello hadn’t either, until after years spent traveling
through eighty-five countries and living abroad, he realized the
most unfamiliar territory was often his own American backyard.
And so, with a camera in hand and an open mind, he began
visiting communities across the country that most media
overlooks or misrepresents, from tiny towns in Appalachia to the
streets of East LA.

What began as curiosity became—one story at a time—an intimate,
revealing portrait of America today. From road trips and chance                Page Count: 288 pages
encounters to dinners shared in locals’ homes, Your Fellow                     Territory: World
Americans captures what makes this country so dynamic, so                      Material Available:
resilient, and most of all, so very human. Because what Peter                  Manuscript
discovered on his travels wasn’t a nation torn in two. He found
something more complex and more powerful: people who want
to be seen, who are willing to listen, and who still believe we’re
more alike than we are different.

With humor, exuberance, and reverence for the human spirit,
Your Fellow Americans is a celebration of the United States that
exists far beyond the headlines—and an invitation to sit down,
open up, and rediscover the soul of this place that we call home.




Peter Santenello is an independent journalist and filmmaker with over four million subscribers on
YouTube. He’s traveled to eighty-five countries and lived in five, building a global audience by letting
people tell their stories in their own words.
                                                                                                           29
ROOT THERAPY                                                                                   August 2026

 How to Love Your Hair (And Find Yourself)
                                                                                               Self-help
 Felicia Leatherwood

Embrace and learn to love your natural hair with this eye-
opening guide from “hair whisperer” to the stars, Felicia
Leatherwood.

As a child there was nothing Felicia Leatherwood wanted more
than long, flowy hair. But Felicia’s short afro grew up and out, not
down. Her father who styled Felicia’s hair in her mother’s place,
often didn’t know his own strength, and would rip Felicia’s
delicate strands as he combed through her hair. At a young age,
Felicia internalizes her hair as something to be managed, tamed,
instead of a source of pride.

As hair trends come and go, Felicia’s beloved Jherri curl is
replaced by every braided style in the book. She even tries her
hand at weaves and relaxers. Felicia finds she loves doing hair so
much she leaves her high-paying corporate job to enroll in
beauty school and lands a hot new job at a salon where
celebrities breeze through to freshen up their look. It isn’t long
until Felicia is styling her first celebrity client. Felicia’s love of hair
takes her around the world, to movie sets and several red                     Page Count: 224 pages
carpets.                                                                      Territory: World
                                                                              Agent: Kristin van Ogtrop
In Root Therapy, Felicia shares her journey of hair positivity, which         Material Available:
opens the door to a beautiful spiritual journey of self-love. As a            Manuscript Imminent
celebrity stylist and natural hair educator, Felicia has made it her
life’s mission to share the message of hair acceptance. Complete
with exercises that show you the merits of owning one’s complete
self, Felicia encourages you to embrace your natural hair.




Felicia Leatherwood is the world’s leading celebrity stylist and inspirational beauty speaker regarding
natural hair with over twenty-six years of experience. She conducts hair care workshops for audiences
around the globe under the brand and slogan “Loving Your Hair with Natural Care.”
                                                                                                           30
CHOSEN                                                                                           August 2026

 How Opening My Home Healed My Heart
                                                                                                  Memoir
 Sandra E. Smith

In the tradition of The Glass Castle, a poignant, inspirational
memoir of a lonely girl who survived decades of harrowing
abuse at home to open her heart and redefine what it is to be
a family and a mom.

In the rich tradition of The Glass Castle and Educated, Sandi
recounts her heart-stopping, nomadic upbringing amid the
mountains of Utah, flat farmlands of Idaho, and California sprawl,
as her father’s schemes and scams repeatedly failed. She
escaped to college as a basketball player and worked her way
through law school, rising to head of litigation for Apple and
raising two children. Having built a conventional life, she never
expected to re-examine the pain of her survivalist past.

A sudden move east and a chance encounter inside the parking
garage at the tony, elite Sidwell Friends School forever changed
Sandi’s life. She intersected with three young Black men, all
football players at Sidwell, on scholarship. Sandi and her family
open their home to these young men, and gradually, they share
their own stories of hurt and survival with the woman they call                Page Count: 320 pages
“Momma.”                                                                       Territory: World
                                                                               Agent: Howard Yoon
Fearlessly facing the challenges of race, class, prejudice,                    Material Available:
addiction, and abandonment, Chosen shows us how one                            Manuscript Imminent
determined mother built a family of her choosing and recovered
the affirming healing power of love.




Sandra E. Smith spent many years as an attorney specializing in general civil, intellectual property, trade
secret and criminal litigation. In her last position, she served as Director of Litigation, Apple Computer.
Since then, Sandra has devoted her time to working advocating for African American boys and helping
them through high school, college and beyond, and representing domestic abuse survivors and their
children.
                                                                                                              31
 CAPITALISM IS SEXISM                                                                        August 2026




                                                                                     Philosophy
 Doortje Smithuijsen

A bold and incisive manifesto on the ways sexism is used to
exploit women in a capitalistic system through the personal
lens of dating and influencer culture from a prominent
journalist and cultural critic in the Netherlands.

Young women today are pulled between opposing forces: the
career–family divide, impossible beauty standards, influencer
culture, and the pressure to start Botox “before it’s too late.”
Within capitalism, these inequalities are exploited—women are
cast as natural caregivers even when they’re primary
breadwinners, urged to pursue wellness while losing autonomy,
equality, and genuine connection.

In Capitalism is Sexism, Doortje Smithuijsen examines how
everyday phenomena—from Trad Wives to spin classes—fit into a
system that marginalizes women and monetizes their bodies,
attention, and labor. With sharp insight, she reveals why true
freedom of choice remains so elusive.
                                                                            Page Count: 128 pages
                                                                            Territory: World English
                                                                            Agent: Janneke Louman, Park
                                                                            Uitgevers
                                                                            Material Available:
                                                                            Manuscript Available




Doortje Smithuijsen lives in Amsterdam where she is a philosopher and journalist frequently featured
on Dutch national television and hosts a popular weekly podcast. She has written several books, made
documentaries, and regularly publishes in the Volkskrant newspaper.


                                                                                                          32
 UNCOVERING ANTIOCH                                                                           August 2026

 The Ancient City and Its Lost Treasures of Mosaic Art
                                                                                                History
 Robert Kanigel

The story of the making, loss, and recovery of some of the
greatest treasures of antiquity, raising questions about
ancient mosaic art and its creation, the work of archaeology,
and museum practice.

In 1932, a Princeton-led team broke ground at Antioch, hoping
for sculptures and palaces but instead uncovering the most
extraordinary mosaics the art world had ever seen. Against
financial struggles, clashing personalities, and the shadow of
World War II, the dig yielded treasures that now reside in
museums from the Met to the Louvre.

Antioch tells the remarkable story of this archaeological triumph
while probing deeper questions: Who owns art—the country of
origin or those who excavate it? What makes an artist? And is art
more valuable for its beauty or its history? With vivid storytelling,
Robert Kanigel brings this pivotal dig to life.


                                                                             Page Count: 320 pages
                                                                             Territory: World
                                                                             Agent: Michael V. Carlisle,
                                                                             Inkwell
                                                                             Material Available:
                                                                             Manuscript Available




Robert Kanigel is the author of The Man Who Knew Infinity, Eyes on the Street, The One Best
Way, Hearing Homer’s Song, and six other nonfiction books—in biography, history, history of science, and
memoir. He has been a finalist for the National Book Critics Circle Award and the Los Angeles
Times Book Prize, and a recipient of a National Endowment for the Humanities Public Scholar award as
well as a Guggenheim fellowship.

                                                                                                           33
DISTANCE BETWEEN OUR NAMES                                                                       June 2026

 The Untold History of America's War on Japanese Immigrants
                                                                                                History
 Paul Richter

A gripping historical account about the harrowing struggles
of Japanese immigrants in the US during the years leading to
World War II.

In 1872, a new Japanese government’s first diplomatic
delegation to the United States was greeted with rapturous
welcome in San Francisco. For over ten days of lavish parties, the
city’s elite admired the emissaries’ silk robes and noble bearing
and began forging what they expected would be a special
relationship between ascendant Pacific nations. Three decades
later, a young Japanese immigrant disembarked at the very same
waterfront to a different reception. “I was baptized with horse
dung,” Nisuke Mitsumori recalled. “This was my very first
impression of America.

The Distance Between Our Names is the story of the early battles
over Japanese immigration—the less dramatic, more insidious
chapter. Esteemed journalist Paul Richter researched hundreds of
memoirs, public records, news reports, and oral histories to
deliver an urgent account of immigration history. This highly                Page Count: 288 pages
relevant book is enlivened by intimate stories of the newcomers—             Territory: World
high and humble—such as the children banned from public                      Agent: Gail Ross, Ross Yoon
schools, farmers struggling in a system rigged against them, the             Agency
women who were swindled into marriages resulting in lifetimes                Material Available:
of hardship, immigrant leaders battling to forestall punitive laws.          Manuscript Available
Taken together, The Distance Between Our Names is a stunning
narrative of resilience and struggle, a gripping story of one
community’s brave fight for dignity in the face of savage
discrimination.




Paul Richter has written about national affairs and foreign policy for four decades. As a journalist for
the Los Angeles Times, he was based in Los Angeles, New York, and Washington, DC, and reported from
sixty countries. During his years in Los Angeles he was principal author of California and the American
Tax Revolt: Proposition 13 Five Years Later. His last book was The Ambassadors: America’s Diplomats on
the Front Lines. The volume won the American Academy of Diplomacy’s Douglas Dillon Award for Books
of Distinction on the Practice of American Diplomacy.
                                                                                                           34
SHADOW OVER THE WORLD                                                                       September 2026

Franklin D. Roosevelt, the Rise of Fascism, and the Making of
America's World War II                                                                            History
William I. Hitchcock

From New York Times bestselling author William I. Hitchcock,
a riveting revisionist portrait of Franklin Delano Roosevelt in
the lead-up to World War II, tracing his—and America’s—
awakening to the threat of fascism.

How did FDR and the American public respond to the rise of
dictators across Europe and Asia on the eve of World War II? The
familiar narrative is that they reacted with indifference and
embraced isolationism. Only with the Japanese attack on Pearl
Harbor were Americans reluctantly drawn into the global conflict.
But distinguished historian William I. Hitchcock reveals a far more
complex and surprising story.

From the time Mussolini came to power in 1922 to America’s
entry into the war in 1941, Americans engaged in a fraught
national debate over the rising threat—and for some, the lure—of
fascism. At the center of this debate was Roosevelt himself. When
he took office in 1933, Roosevelt was determined to avoid
foreign entanglements that would harm his ambitious domestic
agenda of the New Deal. But over the course of his first two                   Page Count: 512 pages
terms, a network of journalists, activists, advisers, and diplomats            Territory: World
gradually awakened him to the global dangers of fascism.                       Agent: Susan Rabiner
                                                                               Material Available:
Roosevelt’s transformation was part of a larger national                       Manuscript Available
reckoning with authoritarianism around the world. A Shadow
Over the World shines a light on a time when a coalition of
courageous humanists gathered around a visionary leader to
forge a new purpose for America: to protect democracy, oppose
imperialism, support human rights, and lead a global fight for
freedom. Their successful struggle against the dark forces of
fascism holds powerful lessons for our own perilous times.




 William I. Hitchcock is a New York Times bestselling author and award-winning teacher who has
 published numerous books relating to World War II and the Cold War, including The Bitter Road to
 Freedom: A New History of the Liberation of Europe, which was a finalist for the Pulitzer Prize and a
 winner of the George Louis Beer Prize from the American Historical Association. He has been a Fulbright
 scholar, a fellow of the Nobel Institute in Oslo, the holder of the Henry Kissinger Chair at the Library of
 Congress, and a Berlin Prize fellow at the American Academy in Berlin.

                                                                                                               35
 INSIDE THE OWNER'S BOX                                                                   September 2026

 Power and Leadership in Sports
                                                                                               Business
 David M. Rubenstein
Go inside the high-stakes world of sports ownership as New
York Times bestselling author and owner of the Baltimore
Orioles David M. Rubenstein reveals the financial strategies,
leadership secrets, and billion-dollar deal-making behind
championship franchises through conversations with
America's most powerful owners—Jerry Jones, Robert Kraft,
Mat Ishbia, and more.

What does it really take to own a championship franchise?

David M. Rubenstein, bestselling author and Baltimore Orioles
owner, reveals the insider secrets of professional sports
ownership through candid conversations with America's most
powerful team owners.

Discover:

• How owners negotiate billion-dollar franchise acquisitions
• The financial playbook behind elite ownership—valuations,
  salary caps, private equity, and profit engines                            Page Count: 384 pages
• Mastering media rights, sports betting, and the evolving fan               Territory: World
  economy                                                                    Agent: Robert Barnett
• Leadership lessons: Building championship cultures that win
                                                                             Material Available:
  on and off the field
                                                                             Manuscript Available

Inside the Owner’s Box offers unprecedented access to the
strategies and decision-making of sports’ most successful
owners. Whether you’re captivated by the business of sports or
the game itself, this is your insider's guide to competing—and
winning—at the highest level.




David M. Rubenstein is the New York Times bestselling author of How to Invest, How to Lead, The
American Experiment, and The American Story. He is cofounder and cochairman of The Carlyle Group,
one of the world’s largest and most successful private equity firms. Rubenstein is Chairman of the Boards
of the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, the Council on Foreign Relations, the National
Gallery of Art, the Economic Club of Washington, and the University of Chicago.
                                                                                                            36
THE BLUE PRINT                                                                          September 2026

Inside the Business of Roc-A-Fella Records
                                                                                             Business
Sowmya Krishnamurthy

Dive into the story of how three ambitious and distinct
personalities built one of the most successful and culturally
consequential hip-hop record labels in America: Roc-A-Fella
Records.

In the gritty streets of Brooklyn and Harlem, three young men—
Shawn “Jay-Z” Carter, Damon “Dame” Dash, and Kareem “Biggs”
Burke—forged a dream from the ashes of their struggles.
Dismissed by every major label, they turned their hustler instincts
into a music empire. Roc-A-Fella Records was born, and with it, a
new era in hip-hop.

But as their empire grew, so did the tensions among the
founders. Jay-Z’s rising fame and business acumen began to
overshadow the collective identity of Roc-A-Fella. His arrest in
1999 and the release of The Black Album in 2003 marked a
turning point, leading to the label’s eventual sale to Def Jam in
2004. Post-dissolution, the founders pursued separate paths, but
their shared history continued to haunt them.
                                                                           Page Count: 288 pages
This is not just the story of Roc-A-Fella. It’s also a story about the     Territory: World
ascension of Hip Hop as a global cultural influence, the business          Agent: Robert Guinsler,
of the music industry, and how this record label and their                 Sterling Lord Literistic
entrepreneurial ethos enabled them to make $500 million dollars            Material Available:
at the height of their success, while also creating global icons in        Manuscript Imminent (April)
the process—Jay-Z, Kanye West, J. Cole, Rihanna, and more.
Capitalism is capitalism whether it’s on the street corner or in the
corner office and Roc-A-Fella Records remains a testament to the
American Dream, a story of ambition, innovation, and the
inevitable strains of success.




Sowmya Krishnamurthy is a music journalist and pop culture expert. Her work has been featured in
Time, Rolling Stone, Complex, XXL, Playboy, Highsnobiety, and NPR. She is a graduate of the Ross School
of Business at the University of Michigan and lives in New York City.
                                                                                                          37
THE AGE OF CURES                                                                        September 2026

How American Scientists Saved Your Life
                                                                                               History
Barry Werth

From the acclaimed author of Billion Dollar Molecule and The
Antidote, a revisionist, passionate history of the
pharmaceutical industry, detailing how the nascent industry
ushered in an age of cures.

The Age of Cures is the in-depth history of the birth of the
pharmaceutical industry in the United States. Barry Werth is the
author of Billion Dollar Molecule and The Antidote, two highly
acclaimed books on the pharmaceutical industry. In The Age of
Cures, he takes us back to a time before modern medicine.

In the early part of the twentieth century, patients routinely died
from the flu, if they didn’t contract a more potent disease like
rubella, mumps, or polio. Yet with advances in technology, the
young talent at universities across the country, and the significant
investment from a federal government eager to prepare for a
second world war, medicine exploded in the 1930s to the 1960s
to finally meet the needs of a sick populace. Finally, “miracle
drugs” were available for the first time: penicillin and wide-
spectrum antibiotics, cortisone, and a polio vaccine.                       Page Count: 400 pages
                                                                            Territory: World in the English
Werth convincingly shows us how this crucial investment in                  language
science made America modern, and a scientific powerhouse for                Agent: Amanda Urban, CAA
decades to come..                                                           Material Available:
                                                                            Manuscript Available




Barry Werth is an award-winning journalist and the acclaimed author of seven books. His landmark first
book, The Billion-Dollar Molecule, recounts the founding and early struggles of a start-up pharmaceutical
company. Werth’s articles have appeared in The New Yorker, The New York Times Magazine, and GQ,
among others.

                                                                                                              38
 F*CK FAILURE                                                                              September 2026

 How American Scientists Saved Your Life
                                                                                                Self-help
 benny blanco

A no bullsh*t guide to success from benny blanco––Grammy
Award-winning producer, artist, bestselling cookbook author,
and husband to Selena Gomez––that teaches you how to
achieve your wildest dreams by seizing the most powerful
opportunity you’ll ever be handed: failure.

You want success? You gotta fail better.

Take it from me, a person who has succeeded, then failed, then
succeeded, then failed, then succeeded again. I fail constantly.
I’ve had small, everyday failures and massive failures that last for
years. I’ve learned a few tricks along the way, and all of them have
to do with turning f*cking up into an artform.                                Page Count: 400 pages
                                                                              Territory: World
My job as a producer is to pull success out of someone. My                    Agent: Amanda Urban, CAA
superpower is helping people tap into the success that’s already              Material Available:
inside of them. Failure is just another rehearsal for your opening            Manuscript Imminent
night. Failure is just more practice for perfection. And soon
enough, failure will start to feel good. Once you realize that
failure is freedom, you’ll never look back.

F*ck Failure gives you the non-shortcut shortcuts to success,
including tips, tricks, mindset practices, and mental exercises. If
you let it, this book can change your life. But I want you to know
something: Even after you’ve read it five times, even after all of
your dreams have come true . . . you are still going to be a failure.
And that’s the point.




 benny blanco is a record producer, songwriter, artist, actor, record executive, and the bestselling author
 of the cookbook Open Wide. blanco has contributed to the sale of hundreds of millions of albums
 worldwide through his work with artists including Ed Sheeran, SZA, Justin Bieber, Rihanna, Katy Perry,
 The Weeknd, Maroon 5, Juice WRLD, Sia and many more. blanco made his TV debut playing a
 fictionalized version of himself on the FXX series Dave with Lil Dicky which has become the #1 comedy
 on FX and FXX. His most recent album with his wife Selena Gomez I Said I Love You First came out in
 2025.



                                                                                                              39
CULTURE COMPASS                                                                          October 2026

Navigate the Corporate World Without Losing Yourself
                                                                                           Business
Arturo Nuñez

A compelling and nuanced guide detailing the skills
necessary for people of color to thrive in corporate America,
particularly at the C-Suite level, without compromising one's
own identity and integrity.

With the percentage of ethnic and racial minorities reaching
unprecedented heights in corporate America, we’re in uncharted
territory regarding how this growing demographic navigates
companies with cultures that can be foreign, alienating, and
downright hostile to these shifts in the workplace.

The Culture Compass provides its readers with the tangible skills,
insights, and practices that make this shift in corporate leadership
more than a trend, but sustainable. Harder than getting these
positions for minorities is keeping them, and the primary
difficulty consistent in attainting and maintaining this seat of
power is the dearth of people who have the unique experience of
negotiating the politics of the boardroom, the hypervisibility of
being the “only one” or “one of the few” at the table, and the
responsibility that comes with representation.                            Page Count: 288 pages
                                                                          Territory: World
With over twenty years of C-suite experience, Arturo Nuñez has            Agent: Regina Brooks,
worked at the world’s largest companies: he served as the VP of           Serendipity Literary Agency
Latin America for the National Basketball Association, the Global         Material Available:
VP of Basketball Marketing for Nike, the Head of Marketing of             Manuscript Available
Latin America for Apple, and was recently elected to Estee
Lauder’s board of directors. It’s easy to regard Nuñez as an avatar
for the concept of the American exception, but The Culture
Compass seeks to rewrite this narrative and provide the reader
with the tools they need to advance to the C-suite.




 Arturo Nuñez is a seasoned executive and entrepreneur with decades of experience at globally
 recognized organizations, including Apple, Nike, Pepsi, The NBA. He is the CEO and founder of AIE
 Creative, providing immersive experiences for a curated selection of brands and a Board Member of
 Abercrombie & Fitch Co., The Estee Lauder Companies and the NBA Players Association.

                                                                                                        40
PRESIDENT AND THE OLIGARCH October 2026
Roosevelt, Mellon and the Triumph of Big Government
                                                                                             History

 Greg Steinmetz

Why did one of our greatest presidents ruthlessly persecute
one of the richest men in America?

By any measure, Franklin D. Roosevelt is one our most admired
presidents. But behind the beaming smile and folksy fireside
chats was a ruthless politician willing to use the massive powers
of the federal government to crush his enemies. In this thrilling
exposé, Greg Steinmetz recounts how FDR targeted America’s
third-richest man to prove his progressive credentials and rally
support for his sweeping social agenda.

He found his scapegoat in former Treasury Secretary Andrew
Mellon. Mellon’s name dripped riches. More than any other, it
symbolized the Roaring Twenties economic boom and the crack
up that followed. FDR publicly blamed Mellon for the Great
Depression, using him as a convenient diversion from the New
Deal’s failure to bring jobs back to a devastated economy.

Roosevelt tortured the aging, frail and reclusive Mellon, cooking
up a fake criminal charge in a bid to put him behind bars. When            Page Count: 368 pages
that fizzled, Roosevelt kept up the fight by making Mellon                 Territory: World
miserable in tax court. Mellon died before the verdict but not             Agent: David Kuhn and Nate
until, one final, jaw dropping twist occurred in this strange clash        Muscato, Aevitas Creative
of titans.                                                                 Management
                                                                           Material Available:
This shocking book reveals the secret sinister side of Roosevelt—          Manuscript Available
and explains how big government won out of over the libertarian
economic order that had reigned since the birth of the republic.




Greg Steinmetz is a retired partner of a money management firm in New York. He previously worked
for The Wall Street Journal, where he covered investment banking before becoming Berlin Bureau Chief
and then London Bureau Chief. His first book, The Richest Man Who Ever Lived: The Life and Times of
Jacob Fugger, was heralded by Andrew Ross Sorkin as one of the best reads of 2015. The Wall Street
Journal and Jim Cramer named his second book, American Rascal: How Jay Gould Built Wall Street's
Biggest Fortune, as a top book of 2025.
                                                                                                        41
AMERICAN SOCIALIST                                                                         October 2026

The Life and Legacy of Eugene V. Debs
                                                                                              History
Shawn Gude

Before Bernie Sanders, before Zohran Mamdani, America’s
favorite socialist was Eugene Debs.

In 1912, some 1,200 Socialists held elected office across the
United States. Wisconsin had a Socialist congressman in
Washington, and ministers in Oklahoma preached the gospel of
“Christian socialism” at revival-style gatherings come
summertime. The leader of this vibrant movement? One Eugene
V. Debs—part working-class agitator, part radical prophet, a man
who made it feel like being an American and a socialist was the
most natural thing in the world.

Even opponents would describe Debs as Christlike.

But this was the Gilded Age: an era of corporate tycoons and
outrageous sums of money in politics, of grueling hours and few
rights for workers (if any). And when, in 1894, the president sent
in thousands of troops to break a nationwide railroad strike Debs
helped organize, Debs was radicalized. He emerged from a six-
month prison sentence as a crusader, a stirring orator who would           Page Count: 400 pages
soon see all forms of unaccountable power—rich over poor, men              Territory: World
over women, white over Black, colonizer over colonized—as                  Agent: Ian Bonaparte,
poisonous to human freedom. When Debs ran for president in                 Janklow & Nesbit
1920 from behind bars, he received almost a million votes.                 Material Available:
                                                                           Manuscript Available
A rousing, poignant, intimately human tale of struggle against
the odds, American Socialist is a stunning portrait of one man’s
radicalization—and of the country he radicalized in turn. It’s a story
that speaks powerfully to our own Gilded Age, when the very
wealthy again rule America’s political and economic life and
millions are looking for an alternative.




Shawn Gude is a former editor at Jacobin. Born in Iowa and a proud product of its public schools, he
lives with his wife in New York City.

                                                                                                        42
 LIVE LIKE A CITIZEN                                                                          October 2026

 8 Ways to Change your Mindset and Our Country
                                                                                                 Politics
 Eric Liu

An spiritual guide to creating hope and healing in American
civic life.

We live in a time of fracture and lost faith. But most Americans
don’t want this feeling. Most of us, the exhausted majority, want
to be invited into something better. That’s the call of Live Like a
Citizen: to give everyone the tools to turn away from the
resentment and cynicism eroding democratic life. To turn toward
a healthier way of living together. Eric Liu, CEO of Citizen
University, gives readers eight deep practices for rekindling our
belief in democracy—and our own humanity.

Each chapter centers on a single verb—an elemental civic way to
be and to be with.

Democracy works only if enough of us believe democracy works.
Live Like a Citizen will give you reason to believe—and the tools to
transform belief into everyday action.

                                                                              Page Count: 288 pages
                                                                              Territory: World
                                                                              Agent: Rafe Sagalyn
                                                                              Material Available:
                                                                              Manuscript Imminent




Eric Liu is the cofounder and CEO of Citizen University and author of numerous acclaimed books on
democracy and American identity. His TED Talks on power and democracy have been viewed over ten
million times. Liu served as a White House speechwriter for President Bill Clinton and as the President’s
deputy domestic policy adviser. He was later appointed by President Barack Obama to the board of the
Corporation for National and Community Service. Liu is a member of the American Academy of Arts and
Sciences.
                                                                                                            43
OVERCOMING INFIDELITY                                                                            October 2026

10 Conversations to Help Heal the Hurt
                                                                                                   Self-help
 Carl Lentz and Laura Lentz

A raw and unflinching road map to relational restoration for
couples struggling to survive the tumultuous journey of
infidelity and betrayal.

At the height of his career, celebrity pastor Carl Lentz’s
extramarital affair was splashed across the nation’s headlines,
leaving his seemingly perfect marriage and career in ruins. In
Overcoming Infidelity, the Lentzes share their unfiltered journey
to rekindle their love and the wisdom they learned along the way.

While deeply vulnerable and filled with gripping narrative, this
book is no mere memoir. It’s a practical road map for how to
restore trust and truly heal. Guiding readers through ten critical
conversations that arise in the aftermath of infidelity, the Lentzes
give readers a highly practical framework for navigating the
biggest questions every hurting couple must wrestle with,
including: Can we ever trust again? How do we tell our kids? Will
the pain ever go away?

Overcoming Infidelity offers readers hope through a bold                        Page Count: 224 pages
promise—it’s possible to build a marriage that’s even better than               Territory: World
before—paired with the practical tools and spiritual wisdom to                  Agent: Karen Kinney, KK
realize it. It’s an urgently needed roadmap for anyone whose                    Entertainment
marriage has fractured under pressure and suspect leaving might                 Material Available:
not be God’s best ending to their love story.                                   Manuscript Imminent




Carl Lentz is a thought leader, cohost of the popular Lights On podcast, and sought-after speaker at
churches and conferences. For years, he and his wife Laura led Hillsong NYC, one of the most influential
churches in the world. Today, he works as a church consultant and coach focused on helping others
recover and reclaim their identity after marital failures, addictions, and other personal crises. He is author
of Own the Moment: How to Live a Spiritual Life in a Secular World

Laura Lentz is a writer, cohost of the popular Lights On podcast, and former ministry leader with more
than twenty years of experience walking alongside women and families through seasons of deep
personal change. For years, she and her husband Carl led Hillsong NYC, one of the most influential
churches in the world. Today, she works as a coach focused on helping women heal from betrayal,
rebuild trust, find their voice, and grow into the fullness of who they were created to be. Overcoming
Infidelity is Laura’s first book.
                                                                                                                 44
ALL IN YOUR HEAD                                                                            October 2026

Illness as Identity, Trauma as Fashion, and the Desire
to be Disordered                                                                          Mental Health
 Fredrik deBoer

A searing account of the ways in which mental health culture
distorts our understanding of mental illness, abandons the
severely ill, and threatens the lives of millions who
desperately need care.

Mental health culture in the 21st century is broken. After decades
of influence from the anti-psychiatry movement, our conception
of mental illness has become hopelessly romanticized, distorted
by fictional depictions of madness that minimize the harms of
debilitating conditions. It’s become fashionable to insist that
mental illness is socially constructed, politically imposed, or
secretly empowering. But these claims are dishonest and
destructive. Treating them as metaphors or identities does not
liberate the afflicted. It condemns them.

With All in Your Head, Fredrik deBoer offers a powerful and long-
overdue critique of modern mental health culture. He shows how
deinstitutionalization, a well-intended but ultimately doomed
corrective to psychiatry’s early abuses, collapsed into a
humanitarian disaster, leaving the severely mentally ill to cycle           Page Count: 336 pages
through homelessness, incarceration, and neglect. More recently,            Territory: World
the “gentrification of disability” has turned mental illness into           Agent: William Callahan,
social currency, even as those with the most disabling conditions           Inkwell Management
deteriorate on the streets. The digital age has only intensified this       Material Available:
crisis, spreading implausible self-diagnoses and turning rare               Manuscript Imminent
disorders into identity theater, while the truly ill are left out of the
conversation.

Bracing and rigorously argued, All in Your Head is a call for an
honest reckoning. Psychiatry, despite its flaws, remains the only
lifeline for millions. To abandon it is to abandon the most
vulnerable among us.




Fredrik deBoer is a writer and academic. His writing has appeared in The New York Times, the Los
Angeles Times, The Washington Post, Detroit Free Press, The Boston Globe, Playboy, and Harper’s
Magazine, among many others. He is the author of The Cult of Smart, How Elites Ate the Social Justice
Movement, and the novel The Mind Reels.

                                                                                                        45
INTERROGATION OF SADDAM                                                                      October 2026


HUSSEIN                                                                                         History
 How One Man Took On Saddam Hussein—and Won
 George Piro

The lead US interrogator of Saddam Hussein George Piro
delivers a riveting account of his six months with Saddam, in
formal interrogations and unguarded conversations,
revealing surprising truths about the dictator’s psyche, the
complexity of power, and key decisions that shaped today’s
Middle East.

In The Interrogation of Saddam Hussein, George Piro, an
Assyrian-American, Arabic-speaking former FBI Special Agent,
recounts his extraordinary experiences as the lead interrogator of
Saddam Hussein during his US captivity. Over six months, Piro
spent more than five hundred hours with the former Iraqi
dictator, forging an unprecedented connection with a man
defined by his brutal and oppressive rule. Through one-on-one
conversations in the exercise yard, during doctors’ visits, and
over morning cups of coffee, as well as passages from Saddam’s
prison diary, Piro unveils a complex portrait of a war criminal,
poet, father, and tyrant.

This gripping narrative offers a rare glimpse into Saddam                    Page Count: 352 pages
Hussein’s psyche, his reflections on power, and his role in                  Territory: World in the English
shaping the Middle East. Piro’s account also sheds light on US               language
actions and perceptions, providing critical insights for future              Agent: Gail Ross
foreign policy decisions. The Interrogation of Saddam Hussein is             Material Available:
not just a story of one man’s incredible mission—it’s a profound             Manuscript Available
exploration of leadership, accountability, and the human cost of
war.




George Piro is an Assyrian-American and a former assistant director of the FBI. He served as special
agent in charge at the FBI’s Miami Field Office and was later selected to lead the team interrogating
Saddam Hussein.

                                                                                                               46
PERFECT GIFT                                                                           November 2026



                                                                                             Humor
Julio Torres


From the beloved comedian and SNL writer Julio Torres, a
hilarious and whimsical journey through the art of giving.

In this beautifully illustrated book from a brilliantly absurd mind,
Julio Torres, cult comedian, filmmaker, and former Saturday
Night Live writer, brings his signature surreal humor to this
creative collection of gifts for every person and occasion. A
playful yet profound reflection on human connection, each gift
builds on the relationship between the giver and recipient. These
are not simply objects—these are bridges: a sublet map to
maximize the space in your apartment; a patient grandson who
helps with technology; tiny, little stairs so your dreams can come
out at night and dance. Delightfully impractical, yet deeply artistic      Page Count: 144 pages
and innovative, The Perfect Gift is the perfect kids book for              Territory: World
adults: a celebration of the imagination, especially for those who         Agent: Richard Abate, 3 Arts
expect the unexpected.                                                     Entertainment
                                                                           Material Available:
                                                                           Manuscript Available




Julio Torres is a comedian, the creator of the HBO special My Favorite Shapes, and has written for
Saturday Night Live. He’s also one of the masterminds behind Los Espookys, HBO’s Spanish-language
comedy about a group of horror enthusiasts.

                                                                                                          47
 FOUR-LETTER NATION                                                                       November 2026

 The Long Dirty History of American Profanity
                                                                                          History/Humor
 Steven H. Jaffe

The untold story of how America really talks, for readers of
Mary Roach and Bill Bryson—and anyone who’s ever
wondered about the power of “bad” words.

For 400 years, Americans have been told to watch their
language. For 400 years, the’ve refused to listen.

Four-Letter Nation reveals the hidden history behind America’s
most forbidden words—and why they’ve never really been
forbidden at all. This isn’t a simple tale about prohibition giving
way to permissiveness. It’s the surprising truth about how “bad
words” built America.

From Puritan colonies where blasphemy could get you whipped,
to Civil War battlefields where profanity became poetry, to
modern comedy clubs where curse words became currency,
historian Stephen Jaffe uncovers the rogues and revolutionaries
who weaponized taboo language to challenge authority, claim
their identities, and reshape what it means to be American.                  Page Count: 288 pages
                                                                             Territory: World
You’ll discover:
                                                                             Agent: Michael V. Carlisle,
-Why colonial Americans swore differently than the British (and
                                                                             Inkwell
what that says about democracy).
                                                                             Material Available:
-How the Civil War created an explosion of new profanity that
horrified—and secretly thrilled—the nation.                                  Manuscript Imminent
-The surprising role of women in preserving America’s dirtiest
words.
-How Hollywood and hip-hop transformed curse words from
moral failings into artistic statements.

This book is the story of American rebellion told through its most
authentic voice. Four-Letter Nation proves that America’s “bad
language” isn't a bug in our national character—it’s a feature. And
it always has been.




Steven H. Jaffe is a writer, historian, and curator who has worked for a wide range of museums and
institutions, including the Museum of the City of New York, the South Street Seaport Museum, the New -
York Historical Society, and the American Jewish Historical Society. He is the author of New York at
War and Activist New York, among other books.
                                                                                                           48
                                                                                           November 2026
HOW NOT TO BE A MOVIE STAR
                                                                                                 Memoir
 Shannyn Sossamon

Poignant and beguiling tales from a reluctant movie star.

Discovered in Hollywood! A fantasy for so many. At the age of
twenty, Shannyn Sossamon found herself in this rare and highly
coveted position after a chance encounter with a major casting
director led to a string of starring roles in movies such as A
Knight’s Tale, The Rules of Attraction, and 40 Days and 40 Nights.
Yet as her fame grew, she soon realized that being discovered in
Hollywood is not as lucky as it seems.

How Not to Be a Movie Star is the story of a misfit, a young girl
becoming a young woman becoming a young mother in a world
that was never meant for her. Not quite a memoir, but rather a
channeling of sorts. Through lyrical writing, sharp insight, and
more than a few handfuls of strange, Sossamon takes us into her
private world of memories and passions as she navigates a darkly
humorous variety of predicaments. Who knew running from the
spotlight could be more adventurous than running toward it?
                                                                                Page Count: 256 pages
                                                                                Territory: World
                                                                                Agent: Scott Kaufman,
                                                                                Buchwald Agency
                                                                                Material Available:
                                                                                Manuscript Imminent




Shannyn Sossamon is a versatile artist focused mainly on storytelling through the tarot, moving pictures,
and words on a page. After a few decades of reluctantly acting in front of the camera, she dreams of one
day retiring to an old inn by the sea, where she will teach and read more tarot, write more words on a
page, and sit behind the camera where she belongs.
                                                                                                            49
 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO                                                                         November 2026



 DMX                                                                                 Spirituality/Memoir
 DMX

A posthumous book from hip-hop legend DMX that brings
readers into the heart of his faith—a raw, redemptive
collection of prayers and never-before-seen spiritual writings
revealing the struggle and hope behind one of music’s most
uncompromising voices. Authorized by the Estate of Earl
“DMX” Simmons and carefully curated by co-administrators
Desiree Lindstrom and Sasha Simmons.

DMX was celebrated for his brutally honest lyrics and raw,
emotional delivery. Beneath that intensity was a man of deep and
unshakable faith, relentlessly searching for grace while openly
wrestling with temptation, suffering, and redemption. His
prayers, whether whispered in solitude or spoken before
thousands, revealed a soul determined to reconcile pain with
purpose and anger with surrender. Through that vulnerability, he
transformed hip-hop into testimony.

In quiet moments, DMX recorded his spiritual reflections
wherever he could—on napkins, receipts, and hotel notepads—
capturing his faith in its most immediate and unfiltered form. The              Page Count: 208 pages
Gospel According to DMX gathers this legacy into a posthumous                   Territory: World
collection of his prayers, sermons, spiritual writings, and selected            Agent: Ashley Austin, Artist
lyrics. Presented in a beautifully designed edition crafted to echo             Legacy Group
the enduring form of a Bible, the book features never-before-                   Material Available:
seen handwritten pages that offer an intimate window into the                   Manuscript Imminent
private devotions of a man whose faith was as fierce as his
artistry.




Born Earl Simmons, DMX (1970–2021) was an iconic American rapper, songwriter, and actor. His
explosive 1998 debut album It’s Dark and Hell Is Hot catapulted DMX to super-stardom. He has sold
millions of albums worldwide and is the first rap artist to have five consecutive albums debut at #1 on the
Billboard 200. American Music Award and Billboard Music Award winner, and four-time Grammy
nominee, DMX’s status as one of hip hop's most important and influential figures has long been
solidified. Beyond music, DMX made an indelible mark as an actor, starring in critically acclaimed films
like Belly and the action-packed blockbusters Romeo Must Die, Exit Wounds, and Cradle 2 the Grave.

                                                                                                               50
DADDY ISSUES                                                                               November 2026

A Memoir
                                                                                                 Memoir
 Sofia Franklyn

An unflinching memoir from Sofia Franklyn, cocreator of the
hit podcast Call Her Daddy, offering an explosive story of
power, friendship, reclamation, and surviving yourself.

Long before the internet was watching, Sofia Franklyn learned to
disappear. Dysfunction was normal and escape was instinct. New
York City offered reinvention, and there she met Alex Cooper.
They moved quickly: roommates, best friends, business partners.

Call Her Daddy became a phenomenon overnight, evolving into
a cultural force and transforming its hosts into avatars of a
moment and then into targets. But at the height of the show’s
early success, their relationship imploded.

In hindsight, the warning signs were everywhere. Secrets,
omissions, things left unsaid. Millions watched as Sofia went from
one half of a beloved duo to the villain in the internet’s messiest
breakup. She found herself at rock bottom again, not by the
familiar hands of men, but by the unexpected betrayal of another
woman. What followed was a private collapse that forced a                     Page Count: 256 pages
reckoning, leading Sofia to interrogate her ambition and the cost             Territory: World English
of being understood as a headline.                                            Agent: Emma Kapson &
                                                                              Rebecca Shaevitz, Verve Talent
After years of silence, Sofia tells her side for the first time. Daddy        & Literary Agency
Issues is not a story of revenge. It’s a testimony and a raw, darkly          Material Available:
funny portrait of girlhood, friendship, sexuality, agency, and                Manuscript Imminent
healing. At its core, it is a story of reclamation and the long, brutal
work of surviving yourself.




Sofia Franklyn cocreated and starred in the industry-defining podcast Call Her Daddy. After splitting
with her collaborator and network, Sofia launched her solo podcast Sofia with an F which debuted at #1
overall on the Apple Podcast chart. Now in its sixth year, Sofia with an F has amassed millions of loyal
listeners lovingly referred to as her “sloots.” Sofia’s singular voice takes on conversations about love,
heartbreak, money, society, and mental health. Daddy Issues is her first book.

                                                                                                               51
SHELTER FOR WHEN THE WORLD                                                                  January 2027


IS ENDING
Meditations for Surviving Our Current (and Coming) Apocalypse                                 Spirituality

Drew Jackson

 Drew Jackson, acclaimed poet and public theologian,
 delivers a timely and profound exploration of modern
 existential threats through a unique blend of contemplative
 essays and accessible poetry, perfect for spiritual seekers
 and literary enthusiasts alike.


 In a world teetering on the brink of multiple catastrophes, the
 author reflects on the Climate Clock in New York City,
 symbolizing the urgency of climate change and its impact on
 future generations. This exploration of apocalypse, survival, and
 the human condition weaves together personal narratives,
 historical analysis, and theological reflection. The text begins with
 the author's childhood fascination with archaeology,
 emphasizing the importance of understanding history to envision
                                                                             Page Count:192 pages
 the future. It delves into apocalyptic literature, particularly the
                                                                             Territory: World
 Book of Revelation, and its role in making sense of catastrophic
 events. For readers interested in religious studies, existential            Agent: Christopher Ferebee,
 threats, and the transformative power of love, this book offers a           The Christopher Ferebee
 profound examination of how we can navigate a world on the                  Agency
 edge of chaos.                                                              Material Available:
                                                                             Manuscript TK




 Drew Jackson is a poet, public theologian, and cohost of the popular Everything Belongs podcast. His
 work has been featured in notable publications such as The Isolation Journals with Suleika Jaouad,
 Christianity Today, and Fathom Magazine. Drew has made significant contributions to the arts, including
 being a featured artist on Jon Batiste’s Grammy-nominated album *World Music Radio* and appearing
 in the Netflix documentary American Symphony. He is the author of two acclaimed poetry collections,
 God Speaks Through Wombs and Touch the Earth, the latter of which was named one of Sojourners
 magazine’s Best Books of 2023. Currently, Drew serves as the Managing Director of Formation at the
 Center for Action and Contemplation and holds a position on their executive leadership team.


                                                                                                           52
FINE ART OF LOSING CONTROL                                                                      January 2027

How to Master a Rebellious Brain and Put It to Work for You
                                                                                                 Self-help
  Heather Berlin

  A tour of the science of impulse control that shows readers
  what happens when the “impulse” and “control” areas of the
  brain go out of balance, leading to many of our self-
  destructive behaviors.

  Not all impulses are destructive of course. The impulse to stand
  up and scream along with everyone else in the stadium when
  your team scores a winning goal, and the impulse to stand up
  and scream at your boss during a staff meeting are divided only
  by a few brain circuits that assess context and social
  consequences. The book uses modern neuroscience and
  psychology to show how the brain processes impulses. Dr. Berlin
  shows how the brain works, why impulses sometimes lead us
  astray, and what you can do to take control of your own thoughts
  and behavior, and make your brain work for you.
                                                                               Page Count: 288 pages
                                                                               Territory: World
                                                                               Agent: Jim Levine
                                                                               Material Available:
                                                                               Manuscript TK (Summer 2026)
                                                                               Rights sold:
                                                                               Penguin Random House (UK)
                                                                               Citic Press (Chinese Simplified)
                                                                               Matar (Hebrew)
                                                                               Ushio Shuppansha (Japanese)
                                                                               Wisdom House (Korean)
                                                                               Alpina (Russian)
                                                                               Ediciones Urano (Spanish World)




 Heather Berlin is a neuroscientist and professor of psychiatry at Mount Sinai and hosts Startalk with Neil
 DeGrasse Tyson and the PBS series Science Goes to the Movies.
                                                                                                              53
 EMBRACING MORTALITY                                                                         February 2027

Practices for Overcoming Death Anxiety and Living Beyond Fear
                                                                                               Self-help
 Hillary L. McBride


 Dr. Hillary McBride, bestselling author and psychologist,
 presents Embracing Mortality a groundbreaking guide that
 transforms death anxiety into a profound journey of self-
 discovery and life enrichment

 Dive into the profound exploration of death anxiety and its
 transformative power in this compelling psychology book. The
 author, a survivor of a life-altering car accident, shares personal
 anecdotes and insights into how confronting mortality can lead
 to a more vibrant and meaningful life. Through a blend of
 existential psychotherapy and practical exercises, the text reveals
 how acknowledging and integrating death into one’s
 consciousness can foster a deeper understanding of life and
 enhance personal growth. Readers will learn about the various                 Page Count: 192 pages
 forms death anxiety can take, from obsessive rituals to pervasive             Territory: World
 dread, and discover strategies to manage this universal fear. This            Agent: Angela Scheff, The
 book is ideal for those seeking to understand the human                       Christopher Ferebee Agency
 experience of mortality and for readers interested in self-help,              Material Available:
 existential psychology, and the art of living authentically.                  Manuscript TK




Dr. Hillary L. McBride, a registered psychologist and bestselling author, is a beacon of wisdom and
compassion in the realms of mental health and spirituality. With a PhD and a thriving private practice in
Victoria, BC, McBride has made significant contributions to the fields of eating disorders, psychedelics,
trauma, body image, and death contemplation. Her previous works, including The Wisdom of Your Body
have garnered critical acclaim and established her as a trusted voice. McBride's engaging podcast,
Other People's Problems boasts over 5 million downloads, and her social media presence reaches tens
of thousands of followers.
                                                                                                            54
VAGINA REVOLUTION                                                                        March 2027

How Understanding Your Vaginal Microbiome Can Change Your Life
                                                                                          Health
Ara Katz

From the co-founder and co-CEO of microbiome science
company Seed Health, which reaches more than 84M
followers across its platforms, a groundbreaking book on
women’s health in the bestselling vein of Our Bodies,
Ourselves, and the recent #1 NYT bestseller, The New
Menopause.

You’ve probably heard of the gut microbiome, a massive and
complex community of microorganisms that live inside your
digestive tract and affect your overall health. Widespread
awareness of the gut microbiome has transformed the lives of
millions of people, who now eat, exercise, supplement, and go
about their lives in more strategic ways to support their gut
microbiomes to prevent and even treat illness and disease.
                                                                        Page Count: 320 pages
                                                                        Territory: World
The next frontier is the vaginal microbiome—the ecology of 10
billion microbes that reside in your vagina— which comprises an         Agent: Sarah Passick, Park &
underexplored but critical component of women’s health. More            Fine
than 90% of vaginal health issues are related to the vaginal            Material Available:
microbiome.                                                             Manuscript TK


The Vagina Revolution is poised to be a transformative force,
arming you with knowledge and tools to optimize your vaginal
microbiome and take charge of your health.




The groundbreaking campaigns that Ara Katz leads at Seed have won numerous awards including Inc.’s
Best in Business; Fast Company's World Changing Ideas in 2019, 2020, 2021, 2022, and 2023; and
TIME's Best Inventions 2018, and Ara herself has earned spots on CNBC’s “Changemakers: Women
Transforming Business” (2024) and Inc.’s “100 Female Founders: The Top Women Entrepreneurs of the
Year” (2022), among other accolades.

                                                                                                       55
 DEVIL YOU DON'T KNOW                                                                           March 2027


Cancer Reconsidered: New Insight, New Hope
                                                                                                Science
 David Quammen

Quammen begins in Tasmania, where a contagious cancer has
been moving through the Tasmanian devil population for
decades, spreading like an infection yet behaving like a cunning,
evolving organism in its own right—and forcing us to rethink what
we know about cancer. From that astonishing case, he builds
outward with his trademark mix of reporting, history-of-science,
and character-driven storytelling, taking readers from field
biology to labs to clinics, and making the complex machinery of
tumors feel immediate, legible, and urgent.

The book’s core argument is as radical as it is persuasive: cancer
is evolution in fast-forward, and the most punishing, maximum-
force treatments can unintentionally select for the very resistance
we fear—especially in metastatic disease. Quammen explores the
school of evolutionary oncology and adaptive therapies which
are designed to manage a shifting ecosystem inside the body—
extending life, reducing suffering, and treating some cancers
more like chronic conditions than death sentences.
                                                                               Page Count: 480 pages
                                                                               Territory: World
                                                                               Agent: Amanda Urban, ICM
                                                                               Rights sold:
                                                                               Adelphi (Italian)
                                                                               Material Available:
                                                                               Manuscript




David Quammen’s books include Breathless, The Tangled Tree, The Song of the Dodo, The Reluctant
Mr. Darwin, and Spillover. He has written for The New Yorker, Harper’s Magazine, The Atlantic, National
Geographic, and Outside, among other magazines, and is a three-time winner of the National Magazine
Award.

                                                                                                          56
 CAR WARS                                                                            March 2027

 How China Seized the Auto Industry—and How America Can Win It
 Back                                                     Business
 Michael Dunne


A riveting global narrative about how China, in just three decades,
built an electric vehicle and battery juggernaut that now
dominates markets from Europe to South America.

While U.S. tariffs keep Chinese cars out of American showrooms,
sleek EVs from BYD, Zeekr, and Changan are reshaping roads in
Europe, Asia, and Latin America. Drawing on decades of insider
experience, Michael Dunne reveals the people, strategies, and
staggering scale behind China’s rise to dominance in EVs,
batteries, and software-defined vehicles—transformations already
remaking jobs, markets, and mobility worldwide.

From Shanghai assembly lines to Munich auto shows, Silicon
Valley boardrooms to the streets of Bangkok and São Paulo, Car        Page Count: 288 pages
Wars shows how China toppled century-old Western giants
                                                                      Territory: World
through subsidies, supply chain control, and relentless
                                                                      Agent: Jim Levine, Levine
engineering. Urgent and panoramic, this is the story of the
                                                                      Greenberg Rostan
world’s next industrial revolution—fought on the highways of
                                                                      Rights sold:
Berlin, Bangkok, and Bogotá.
                                                                      Simon & Schuster (UK)
                                                                      Material Available:
                                                                      Proposal




Michael Dunne is an entrepreneur, consultant, keynote speaker and CEO of Dunne Insights, a
world-class advisory service for the global electric and autonomous vehicle markets. Company
leaders in the U.S., Europe and Asia engage Dunne for expert knowledge, keynote talks and
board level briefings. Dunne has lived in Asia for 26 years, calling Bangkok, Thailand and
Jakarta, Indonesia home, and is fluent in Chinese, Indonesian, Thai and French.
                                                                                                  57
 GUESTS OF THE PRESIDENT                                                                   April 2027

 The 982 Holocaust Refugees Who Changed—and Were Changed By—
 an American Town                                       History
 Rebecca Erbelding


The story of 982 Holocaust refugees who were hand-selected
for America’s only World War 2 refugee camp.

In the summer of 1944, 982 men, women, and children—mostly
Jewish, ragged from years of running, some still wearing the
striped uniform of the concentration camps—arrived in Oswego,
NY. For the next 500 days, these refugees--"guests" of
Roosevelt's newly created War Refugee Board, struggle to
assimilate to their new home behind a barbed wire fence, to
grapple with the trauma rapidly catching up with them, and to
contend with their unknown legal status. They deal with the
drama of everyday life: menial work, romance, conflict with each
other and their neighbors. Fourteen people lose their lives and         Page Count: 320 pages
twenty-three people are born, triggering a bureaucratic panic in        Territory: World
Washington as Justice Department lawyers argue about whether            Agent: Anna Sproul-Latimer,
the 14th amendment applied.                                             Neon Literary
                                                                        Material Available:
Ultimately, there’s a happy ending for the refugees. Though they        Manuscript TK
are told they’d have to return to Europe where their families were
murdered, they advocate for themselves to become American
citizens, and the government grants their request. They are
helped by Eleanor Roosevelt, W.E.B. Du Bois, and Albert Einstein,
who all lobby for their cause. They find unlikely allies in the local
townspeople—blue-collar immigrants themselves who come to
love their new neighbors. The refugees and their descendants go
on to do great things: contribute artwork to the Met, become a
co-owner of Zabar’s, and help to develop the Cat scan and MRI,
among other accomplishments.




 Dr. Rebecca Erbelding is the most accomplished historian in America on the subject of U.S.
 responses to the Holocaust. Her first book, Rescue Board (Doubleday, 2018), won the National
 Jewish Book Award.

                                                                                                      58
 1% PRACTICE                                                                            April 2027

 Science-Backed Micro-Practices to Create Lasting Peace
                                                                                     Self-help
 Barb Schmidt


From bestselling author and meditation guru Peaceful Barb,
discover the life-changing power of the 1% Practice, a
science-backed method that transforms your well-being with
just 14 minutes a day.

In this self-help guide, Barb shares her journey from a rigid,
disciplined approach to mindfulness, born out of her battle with
bulimia and the demands of managing multiple McDonald’s
franchises, to finding peace through gentle, everyday practices.
She introduces the 1% Practice, a method that involves
dedicating just 14 minutes a day to moments of awareness,
proving that sustainable change comes from small, repeatable
actions rather than drastic overhauls. Through personal                 Page Count: 192 pages
anecdotes and scientific insights, Barb illustrates how integrating     Territory: World
mindfulness into the chaos of real life can reshape one's identity      Material Available:
and relationships, offering a path to inner peace and resilience        Manuscript TK
for anyone seeking to cultivate a kinder, more compassionate
relationship with themselves.




 Barb Schmidt, known to millions as Peaceful Barb, is a globally recognized motivational
 speaker, meditation teacher, and founder of Peaceful Mind Peaceful Life , a nonprofit dedicated
 to making emotional well-being and mindful living accessible to all. A bestselling author and
 co-host of the popular podcast Life Happens with Barb & Michelle, Barb has spent decades
 guiding individuals, families, and communities toward more grounded, intentional lives.
                                                                                                   59
     FICTION




60
AMERICAN SPIRITS                                                                                   April 2026




                                                                                       Literary Fiction
 Anna Dorn

A love letter to pop music, American Spirits charts an icon’s
fall—and an obsessive fangirl’s rise.

Thirty-eight-year-old Blue Velour has finally achieved the critical
acclaim she’s long been chasing. Over the last decade, she’s
released six studio albums to mixed reviews, landing her
somewhere between performance artist and niche legend. But
her latest album, Blue’s Beard—a cheeky reference to the
subreddit fanatically dedicated to her suspected secret
relationship with longtime producer Sasha Harlow—has rocket-
launched her reputation. Blue hires nerdy superfan Rose Lutz as
her assistant to handle the pressures of the upcoming tour.

When the pandemic shuts down the tour, however, Blue decides
to hole up in the redwoods with Sasha to make another album.
An aspiring singer herself, Rose is frothing at the mouth to be
isolated in a cabin with these two legends, but what begins as a
creative retreat spirals into a flurry of chaos and betrayal—
culminating in a tragic act that changes their lives forever.                 Page Count: 352 pages
                                                                              Territory: World English
Smart, entertaining, and edgy, American Spirits is a compelling               Agent: Sarah Phair, Sanford J.
exploration of the dark side of fame.                                         Greenburger Associates, Inc

       Praise for AMERICAN SPIRITS:

       "The music writing in this book is outstanding,                        Finished Book Available
       including intriguing real-world references and
       annotated playlists that will make you grateful
       for your streaming service. Dorn has a
       profound understanding of the relationship
       between an artist and her work . . . Nuanced
       characters, lively writing, and a heaping
       helping of bad behavior make the pages fly."
       —Kirkus Reviews



Anna Dorn is the author of the novels Perfume and Pain, Exalted, Vagablonde, and American Spirits. She
was a Lambda Literary Fellow and Exalted was a finalist for the Los Angeles Times Book Prize. She lives in
Los Angeles.



                                                                                                               61
LIVONIA CHOW MEIN                                                                               April 2026




                                                                                    Literary Fiction
Abigail Savitch-Lew

In the vein of Happiness Falls and Family Lore, a gripping
story of family history and political upheaval centered around
a Chinese family-owned restaurant in Brownsville, Brooklyn,
and its impact on the neighborhood’s Jewish and Black
residents over the course of a century.

In 1978, two tenements on Livonia Avenue in Brownsville burn to
the ground, killing one resident and displacing dozens of others.
It remains unclear who set the buildings ablaze, but the survivors
are convinced the culprit is Mr. Wong.

Who exactly is Mr. Wong, and what allegedly drove him to this
extraordinary act of violence, is the question that consumes this
novel as it plunges into four generations of Wong family history.
First is Koon Lai, an immigrant who runs a Chinese restaurant on
Livonia Avenue; second, his son Richard, a man desperate for his
own chance at the American Dream; and third, Jason, a poet who
seeks his escape in the bohemian counterculture of the 1970s,
but finds himself an unwitting participant in Brooklyn’s                   Page Count: 368 pages
gentrification. In the 21st century, Jason’s daughter Sadie returns        Territory: World
to Brownsville as a journalist, determined to unravel the mystery          Agent: Jim McCarthy, Dystel,
of what happened decades earlier on the night the buildings                Goderich & Bourret LLC
blazed.                                                                    Material Available:
                                                                           Manuscript
Joining together the present and the past is the community
organizer Lina Rodriguez Armstrong, who was also displaced by
that fire and who has spent the intervening years fighting for the
rights of Brownsville’s residents and organizing a Livonia Avenue
community land trust.

A stunning debut from a new talent, Livonia Chow
Mein contemplates how the American pursuit of freedom relies
on a collective amnesia and challenges us to consider what it
would take for us to truly live in harmony.

Abigail Savitch-Lew is a writer of fiction and nonfiction and an American of Jewish and Chinese
(Ashkenazi and Toisanese) descent. She has a BA in literary arts from Brown University and an MFA in
fiction from Rutgers University-Newark. She is the author of the novel Livonia Chow Mein, and her short
stories have been published in The Round, Post Road, The Best Teen Writing of 2010, and The
Apprentice Writer. Previously, she was a staff reporter for City Limits, an Asian American Writers’
Workshop Margins Fellow, and an adjunct professor of creative writing at Rutgers. She lives in Brooklyn
with her husband, the artist Emmanuel Knight, her sister -in-law, and their cat.

                                                                                                          62
WHERE THE WATER MEETS                                                                            May 2026



THE SKY                                                                             General Fiction
 Diane Les Becquets

For fans of Tell Me Everything and Heartwood, Where the
Water Meets the Sky is the story of a brave young woman
seeking wholeness and love in the untamed forests of
Michigan’s upper peninsula—and answers about a fire that
took away everything.

On a night in January, on the Garden Peninsula of Michigan, a
farmhouse burns to the ground. A young child makes it out and
flees into the woods with a book of matches in her hand.

Ten years later, Abby, a lover of birds and the natural world,
returns to Garden, to the woods and lakes and farms and
fisheries of her childhood, to assist her uncle on an
environmental study of trees. Her best friend, Brew, invites her to
a party where she meets a troubled girl named Seda, on the run
from her abusive ex. Abby sets out to protect Seda and
introduces her to an abandoned cabin that becomes a sanctuary
for them both. Here, Abby begins to process her unrequited
feelings for Brew while also discovering the person she is                  Page Count: 320 pages
becoming. She wants more for her life, a hunger both spiritual              Territory: World
and physical, and seeks to understand the trauma of her                     Agent: Michelle Brower,
childhood that took her mother from her. Abby cares deeply for              Trellis Literary
the people and flora and fauna around her and identifies with the           Material available:
wounds of the environment. She is desperate to remember what                Manuscript
happened the night of the fire and as the summer of 1996
unfolds, Abby will be forced to reckon with the truth.

Perfect for fans of the lush and tender nature writing of Helen
Macdonald and Richard Powers, Where the Water Meets the
Sky is a coming-of-age novel that expertly delves into the
connection between our perception of ourselves and our natural
environs. It is a paean to the vast and beautiful wildscape around
us and to the power of community and the wisdom of love.




Diane Les Becquets is the author of Breaking Wild and The Last Woman in the Forest. Breaking Wild, an
Indie Next Pick and a national bestseller, received starred reviews from Publishers Weekly, Kirkus
Reviews, and Booklist, and was featured on NPR’s Morning Edition. It was the recipient of the Colorado
Book Award in Fiction, the New Hampshire Outstanding Work of Fiction, and was shortlisted for the
Reading the West Book Award in Fiction.
                                                                                                         63
CLOSE RELATIONSHIPS WITH          June 2026



STRANGERS                Literary Thriller
 Krista Diamond

Close Relationships with Strangers follows a Las Vegas
wildlife photographer who moves to Los Angeles to become a
paparazzo and in the process loses his relationships, his
morals, and eventually his tether to reality.

Reviled by celebrities and the public, Ben is one of the last
remaining paparazzi scouring the streets of Los Angeles.
Amateurs with camera phones, social media, and a lack of
bonafide stars have slowly killed a once essential role in the
Hollywood apparatus. Jack Whitlock is one of the last remaining
A-listers, and Ben has followed his career since the years he spent
bussing tables at a diner in Las Vegas where his most popular
movie once filmed a scene.

When Jack Whitlock is suddenly embroiled in a sex scandal, Ben
begins his pursuit, eager for both a big paycheck and a chance to
be close to the elusive star. Along the way, he is haunted by
mistakes from his past: the photos he took of a pop star that have
led to death threats, the ghost of his failed relationship with a         Page Count: 320 pages
burlesque dancer named Ellory, and his abandoned dream of                 Territory: World English
being a wildlife photographer.                                            Agent: Danielle Bukowski,
                                                                          Sterling Lord Literistic, Inc.
Searing and propulsive, Close Relationships with Strangers is a           Material available:
behind the lens tour-de-force through the streets of Los Angeles,         Manuscript
Las Vegas, and the desert in between, as readers follow Ben,
unrelenting, obsessive, and wry, on a quest that will lead either to
his redemption or demise.




Krista Diamond’s writing has appeared or is forthcoming in The New York Times, The Paris
Review, Cosmopolitan, and elsewhere. She holds an MFA from the University of Nevada Las Vegas and
her work has been supported by Bread Loaf, Tin House, and the Nevada Arts Council. She lives in Las
Vegas. Close Relationships with Strangers is her debut novel.


                                                                                                           64
THE HALF LIFE                                                                                    July 2026




                                                                                    Historical Fiction
 Rachel Beanland
“A captivating, whip-smart novel about love, loyalty, and a
woman torn between two lives. I utterly adored it.” —Clare Leslie
Hall, New York Times bestselling author of Broken Country

When twenty-three-year-old Eileen O’Malley meets charismatic
naval officer Paul Archer in a Charleston department store, she
doesn’t expect to fall so hard, so fast. But Paul is funny and
ambitious, and soon, Eileen’s got a ring on her finger and is
following him to the tiny, sun-drenched Mediterranean island of La
Maddalena, where Paul will be heading up Radiological Controls
aboard a submarine tender.

In La Maddalena, Eileen joins a makeshift community of navy wives
who are hell-bent on making the island feel a little more like home.
But for Eileen, whose brother died in Vietnam, home is a loaded
word, and as she settles into life on the island—taking Italian lessons
and learning to make culurgiones—she begins to love the place for
all the ways it is not like where she comes from. Still, it doesn’t take
long for Eileen to be confronted with the complexities of being an
                                                                            Page Count: 480 pages
American abroad. The decision to send nuclear-powered subs into
                                                                            Territory: World
the La Maddalena Archipelago was a contentious one, and the U.S.
                                                                            Agent: Chad Luibl, Janlow &
government is doing whatever it can to ensure that the island—not
to mention all of Italy—doesn’t go communist in the next election.          Nesbit
                                                                            Material available:
When Italian activists and scientists begin to sound the alarm about        Manuscript
possible nuclear contamination in the water, the island erupts in a
series of protests, made worse by the ongoing mishaps of the U.S.
Navy. Soon, Eileen’s marriage falters and her loyalties begin to shift
as she is drawn into a web of secrets—and to a local journalist who
forces her to imagine a life beyond the one she’s been handed.

Atmospheric, sexy, and quietly defiant, The Half Life is a story of
love, complicity, and awakening—of one woman forced to choose
between loyalty to her husband and country and to the Italian locals
who show her the high cost of American exceptionalism.



Rachel Beanland is the author of The House Is on Fire and Florence Adler Swims Forever, which won the
National Jewish Book Award for Debut Fiction. She is a graduate of the University of South Carolina and
earned her MFA in creative writing from Virginia Commonwealth University. She lives with her family in
Richmond, Virginia.


                                                                                                          65
THE PADDOCK CLUB                                                                                   July 2026




                                                                                     Historical Fiction
 Madge Maril
A Formula 1 romance set in the Slipstream universe following
Cat Cromwell, a fashion influencer on a secret mission to ruin a
driver’s reputation, but she may fall for his rival instead.

As a professional heartbreaker, Cat Cromwell knows she’ll never fall
in love—but she’ll pretend to, for a price. A former fashion model in
New York City with a side hustle charming and then dumping the
World’s Worst Men, Cat is offered the chance to pull off her biggest
con yet: date and dump F1 driver Bernard Baudelaire…who
recently left his very angry ex at the altar.

Raised on Formula 1 by a single father herself, Cat is excited to
infiltrate the ivory tower that is the Paddock Club through fashion,
and also to get back at another powerful, spoiled man who feels
entitled to treat women like playthings, something she has
undertaken for women and girls since her early modeling days and
her family’s financial struggles. But Cat’s perfect plan hits the brakes
when Bernard leaves the racing team—and she’s assigned to work
with Faust Ferreira Sanchez instead, a moody F1 driver recovering
                                                                         Page Count: 400 pages
after an apocalyptically embarrassing year in his career.
                                                                             Territory: World English
                                                                             Agent: Ann Leslie Tuttle,
Faust is nothing like the men Cat is paid to date and loves to hate.
He’s quiet. Honest. And absurdly hot in an all-black suit. Worse,            Dystel, Goderich & Bourret
Faust is convinced that Cat isn’t who she claims to be. And he’s             Material available:
particularly interested in why she's flirting with his ex-teammate and       Manuscript
biggest racing rival.

As flying between fashion shows and racing circuits wears Cat’s
carefully crafted mask thin, she finds herself drawn further into
Faust’s steamy game of cat and mouse, and the dangerously real
passion they ignite in each other. But with shadows from Cat’s
checkered past looming in the pit lane, can she find a way to break
her target’s heart without losing the first honest man she’s ever
known? Or will staying in the Paddock Club be the first scam she
can’t pull off?



Madge Maril is a writer, editor, and Byronic hero enthusiast whose work has been published by Harper’s
Bazaar, Cosmopolitan, and more. Previously a beauty and fashion journalist, Madge fell back in love with
fiction through fandom and has been writing stories about big feelings ever since. She lives in Ohio with
her husband and cat.


                                                                                                            66
THE SHADOWS TOMORROW                                                                              August 2026




                                                                                        Literary Thriller
Noelle Michel

Sea of Tranquility meets Dark Matter in this dizzying
speculative thriller following a clan of Neanderthals living in
isolation on a nature reserve and the scientists who care for
them.

A clan of humans—they hunt and gather, they have lovers and
rivals, their own society. They pass on the legends of their
ancestors and celebrate festival nights. Their world is the forest
which feeds them, and, aside from the fierce cold and illness, the
only thing they have to fear is the Beast who prowls the
impassable Bounds. They do not know that beyond it an entirely
different world exists: our world.

Set in the near future, the Neanderthal race has been recreated
from fragments of DNA and reintroduced on a nature reserve
where they are observed and studied, ultimately becoming the
subjects of a hit documentary series. Following a cast of
characters across time: Blood Moon, the leader of the
Neanderthal clan who is mourning the death of her partner,                     Page Count: 304 pages
Blizzard; Eva and Noah, scientists in modern-day Paris hired to                Territory: World English
work on a top-secret project; Jules, a teenager growing up in a
                                                                               Agent: Chrysothemis Armefti,
secluded mountain town with a suspiciously pronounced brow;
                                                                               2 Seas Agency
Adam, an actor brought to appear on NeanderTales for the first
                                                                               Material available:
time; and finally, the man behind the project—but is he Sapien or
                                                                               Manuscript
Neanderthal?

A reeling suspense novel with shocking surprises that also sheds
light on our ethical and moral considerations in and out of
nature, showing the other human we could have been, The
Shadows Tomorrow will grip you until the very end.

Noëlle Michel is a translator and author. An engineer in biological engineering, she worked for ten years
in wastewater treatment. Passionate about languages and literature, she became a freelance translator.
Initially specializing in technical translation, she then developed her skills in literary translation. Noëlle
lives and works in Ghent, Belgium.

Frank Wynne is an Irish literary translator, writer, and editor. He has translated numerous French and
Hispanic authors including Michel Houellebecq, Patrick Modiano, Javier Cercas, and Virginie Despentes.
Over a career spanning more than twenty-five years, his work has twice earned him the IMPAC Dublin
Literary Award, the Independent Foreign Fiction Prize, and been awarded the Scott Moncrieff Prize three
times and the Premio Valle Inclán twice. Most recently, his translation of The Annual Banquet of the
Gravediggers’ Guild by Mathias Énard won the 2024 French-American Prize. He has edited two major
anthologies, Found in Translation: 100 of the Finest Short Stories Ever Translated and Queer: LGBT
Writing from Ancient Times to Yesterday.
                                                                                                                 67
CAMINO                                                                                         August 2026




                                                                                      Literary Thriller
Anya Niewierra

From the Netherlands’s most popular crime writer, a literary
thriller following a woman who walks the Camino de
Santiago, searching for answers about her husband’s death.

Forty-four-year-old chocolatier Lotte Bonnet has been living
happily in South Limburg for years with her husband Emil, a
former refugee from Bosnia. But when Emil unexpectedly dies by
suicide while walking the Camino de Santiago, or Way of Saint
James, Lotte is devastated.

Shocked and confused, Lotte resolves to follow Emil’s exact path
on the Camino one year later, hoping for answers, or at least
insights into what could have compelled him to take his own life.
While walking the arduous trail through central France, passing
idyllic villages and meeting fellow pilgrims, Lotte’s thoughts are
also elsewhere, in Sarajevo, as she learns the terrors of a war and
shocking secrets about her husband’s identity.

Inspired by the natural beauty that surrounds her, forming new               Page Count: 384 pages
friendships, and possibly a romantic connection on the Camino,               Territory: World English
Lotte is distracted as the trail grows more treacherous, and as it           Agent: Hayo Dienum, Shared
becomes clear someone is following her, someone who does not                 Stories Rights Agency
want her to know the truth.                                                  Material available:
                                                                             Manuscript
Fans of Louise Penny’s Inspector Armand Gamache will be
delighted by Lotte’s easy charm and enthralled by the revelations
on her journey. Anya Niewierra’s blockbuster mystery The
Camino has taken Europe by storm and is finally available in
English for the first time.




 Anya Niewierra is the number one bestselling author of the Netherlands, dubbed by the press as the
 new queen of Dutch literature. She has written six books, all of them immense bestsellers. Her
 breakthrough book The Camino has sold well over 800,000 copies in the Netherlands, won both the NS
 Reader’s Award and the Hebban Crime Award, and was the bestselling and most borrowed book of the
 year in the Netherlands in 2024, spending over 170 weeks on the bestseller list. It’s currently being made
 into an international television series and has been published in multiple languages
                                                                                                              68
THE BETRAYAL OF CORA                                                                           October 2026



WEXFORD                                                                               Thriller/Suspense
 Bethany Joy Lenz

From the New York Times bestselling author of Dinner for
Vampires and beloved One Tree Hill actress Bethany Joy
Lenz, a romantic psychological thriller set in Victorian-era
London amid the backdrop of the Jack the Ripper murders.

Cora Wexford is a rare woman in 1880s London: a divorced and
childless artist. Since fleeing her broken life in America a few
years earlier, she has supported herself with the unusual job of
painting commissioned portraits of newly deceased loved ones.
However, she is more interested in a style of work she calls
“pastiche”—in which she reimagines classical paintings with a
contemporary, often shocking twist.

At a birthday party thrown by wealthy friends—who envy her free-
spirited bohemianism—she is introduced to a handsome,
charming and successful stranger named Miles Vera. As Cora’s
love life blossoms, so does her career when she’s asked by an
esteemed gallerist to create a series of pastiches featuring
women who have recently turned up murdered—possibly by the                     Page Count: 240 pages
same killer, whom the tabloids have nicknamed “The Ripper.”                    Territory: World
The paintings become a sensation, and Cora seems to have the                   Agent: Christopher Ferebee
perfect life that eluded her for so long.                                      Material available:
                                                                               Manuscript tk
But all is not as it seems, and Cora soon discovers her own
existence is a kind of pastiche: a romantic veneer with a stark,
sinister reality lurking at the edges.




Bethany Joy Lenz is the New York Times bestselling author of Dinner For Vampires. She starred in the hit
TV series One Tree Hill. Her other acting credits include Guiding Light, Grey’s Anatomy, Charmed,
Felicity, Suits, Dexter, and Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. She is also a recording artist who has released several
albums. Lenz currently cohosts the podcast Drama Queens and is the founder/editor-in-chief of the
broadsheet newspaper Modern Vintage News.
                                                                                                              69
EVERY GOODBYE AIN’T GONE                                                                November 2026




                                                                                    Literary Fiction
 Dana R. Green

A moving and powerful debut novel celebrating and
embracing the richness of life, even in the face of death.

Not long after giving birth to her eighth child, Renie—a thirty-
nine-year-old wife and mother—is diagnosed with Stage 4 breast
cancer with only three months to live. In confronting her own
mortality, Renie creates a journal to leave for her children.

While writing and reflecting, Renie realizes that she has spent her
life in duty of others—her parents, her family, her husband, and
children. With this sudden and momentous revelation, her fear
and subsequent preparation for death becomes replaced with an
intense desire to live her last days on her terms.

With writing that’s both wise and wistful, Every Goodbye Ain’t
Gone is a triumphant celebration of the human spirit from a
powerful and imaginative rising literary voice.

                                                                           Page Count: 256 pages
                                                                           Territory: World English
                                                                           Agent: Daniel Kirschen, CAA
                                                                           Material available:
                                                                           Manuscript




Dana Renee Green holds bachelor’s degrees in biological sciences and nursing, and a master’s degree
in social work. She has three children and has worked as a registered nurse for thirteen years. Every
Goodbye Ain’t Gone is her debut novel.



                                                                                                         70
KINKIER                                                                                          January 2027




                                                                                            Anthology
 R.O. Kwon

A new fiction anthology of provocative stories building on the
groundbreaking New York Times Notable Book KINK.

The follow-up to the wildly successful national bestseller Kink, this
anthology pushes boundaries even further with more daring
explorations of intimacy, desire, and human connection.

MASTERS OF KINK: This collection was curated by R.O. Kwon,
the author of The Incendiaries and Exhibit, who returns as an
editor of the anthology, along with Bryan Washington, author of
Palaver and Family Meal. Both beloved and celebrated as literary
powerhouses, we will tap into their vast resources to amplify the
book.

STAR-POWERED LINEUP: Kinkier features another roster of some
of the most esteemed writers working today: Indira Allegra, Billy-
Ray Belcourt, Maya Binyam, Venita Blackburn, JP Brammer, Mary
H.K. Choi, Jean Kyoung Frazier, Casey Plett, Brontez Purnell, Sam               Page Count: 288 pages
Sax, and Yasmin Zaher.                                                          Territory: World English
                                                                                Agent: Ellen Levine &
                                                                                Danielle Bukowski, Trident
                                                                                Media Group & Sterling Lord
                                                                                Literistic




                                                                                Manuscript TK




R.O. Kwon’s nationally bestselling first novel, The Incendiaries, is published by Riverhead, and it is being
translated into seven languages. Named a best book of the year by over forty publications, The
Incendiaries was a finalist for the National Book Critics Circle John Leonard Award for Best First Book
and Los Angeles Times First Book Prize. Kwon’s writing has appeared in The New York Times, The
Guardian, The Paris Review, NPR, and elsewhere. She is a National Endowment for the Arts fellow.
                                                                                                               71
WELLS WITHOUT WATER                                                                          February 2027




                                                                                           Horror
 Cebo Campbell

From the author of Sky Full of Elephants, a Southern Gothic
novel about the disillusioned son of a preacher who returns
home to uncover a series of violent, supernatural events that
may have root in the cosmic horror of slavery itself.

“Death is a beginning.”

So begins the funeral for fifteen-year-old Timmy from Loblolly
Grove: a sweet, unassuming boy from the neighborhood, who one
day without warning walked into the local police station with a
pistol and attempted to kill everyone inside. Carmichael Franklin, a
law-school dropout whose hope for a better world is masked by a
deep layer of cynicism, has returned home for the procession.
Unlike Carm, his brother Everett has followed in their father's
footsteps and has become a priest — it is he who presides over the
funeral, and from whom Carm hides a terrible secret.

After receiving a prophetic dream from his deceased love — who               Page Count: 384 pages
also happened to be Everett's wife — Carm returns to Loblolly                Territory: World
Grove to find his community crumbling. While the underfunded                 Agent: Byrd Leavell, United
"Lo" has always had its problems, its residents once formed a                Talent Agency
community as close as family. But in the days following Carm's
return, he begins to notice something different — a rising tension,
strange outbursts of violence, and whispers of occult rituals with
blood on their hands.                                                        Manuscript TK

While Carm is initially skeptical of supernatural explanations, he
becomes convinced after watching thirteen-year-old Lily speak
fluent Latin and toss Everett across the room like a ragdoll. With
the help of Everett, who begins to suspect Carm's brotherly
infidelity with each passing day, E.B., a schoolyard friend turned
police chief, and Efe, the hotheaded and possibly psychic
daughter of the neighborhood's former caretaker, he begins to
peel back the layers of a conspiracy that threatens to bring the Lo
to its knees.



Cebo Campbell is the author of Sky Full of Elephants. Winner of the Linda L. Ross Creative Writing
Award and the Stories Award for Poetry, Cebo’s work has been featured in numerous publications. Cebo
is the cofounder of the award-winning creative agency, Spherical, where he leads a team of creatives in
shaping the best hotel brands in the world. He is based in Brooklyn, New York.


                                                                                                           72
BE HAPPY I AM MAD                                                                                     April 2027




                                                                                          Literary Fiction
 Dakota Warren


A sapphic tale of obsessive first love and the relentlessness of
girlhood set across one sticky summer in 1960s Australia.

Aspiring artist Lilith has been dragged to her father's homeland
of Australia, a place in which she never feels at home, following a
scandal she refuses to talk about. Her one saving grace amidst
the oppressive heat and the tight grip of her mother is her
dearest friend, Mona. Lilith is captivated by Mona at first sight,
her obsession manifesting itself in unending feverish
reproductions of da Vinci's most famous work as she paints her
muse again and again. But when Lilith's past begins to interfere
with her present and captivation starts to feel like captivity, can
Lilith and Mona survive the sharpest edges of a love that Lilith
would rather kill than let go of?
                                                                                Page Count: 352 pages
A visceral and discomfiting debut of obsession, possession, and
                                                                                Territory: World
the extremes of how a first love can shape – or mangle – our lives,
                                                                                Agent: Mia Vitale & Sarah
Be Happy I Am Mad is a brutal, disgusting, romantic, and
                                                                                Passick, Park, Fine & Brower
gorgeous escape from a major talent and exciting new voice.
                                                                                Literary Management




                                                                                Manuscript TK




Dakota Warren is an Australian poet, author, and performer who goes by the aliases Lady Dakota and
Nowhere Girl. Raised in rural Australia, Warren started writing as a child and eventually left for the arts.
Her 2022 debut poetry collection, On Sun Swallowing, was a finalist for a Goodreads Choice Award and
became an international bestseller.


                                                                                                               73
74
PARIS EXPRESS                                                                                    March 2025




                                                                                     Historical Fiction
Emma Donoghue

From the bestselling and “soul-stirring” (Oprah Daily) author
of Room, a sweeping historical “nail-biter” (People) of a novel
about the infamous 1895 disaster at the Paris Montparnasse
train station.

Based on an 1895 disaster that went down in history when it was
captured in a series of surreal, extraordinary photographs, The
Paris Express is a propulsive novel set on a train packed with a
fascinating cast of characters who hail from as close as Brittany
and as far as Russia, Ireland, Algeria, Pennsylvania, and
Cambodia. Members of parliament hurry back to Paris to vote; a
medical student suspects a girl may be dying; a secretary tries to
convince her boss of the potential of moving pictures; two of the
train’s crew build a life away from their wives; a young anarchist
makes a terrifying plan, and much more.

From an author whose “writing is superb alchemy” (Audrey
Niffenegger, New York Times bestselling author), The Paris
Express is an evocative masterpiece that effortlessly captures the           Page Count: 288 pages
politics, glamour, chaos, and speed that marked the end of the               Territory: World ex UK
19th century.                                                                Agent: Kathleen Anderson,
                                                                             Anderson Literary
                                                                             Management
                                                                             Rights Sold:
                                                                             Grupo Anaya (Spanish)
                                                                             Giulio Einaudi Editore (Italian)
                                                                             Porto Editora (Portuguese)



                                                                             Finished Book Available




 Born in Dublin in 1969, Emma Donoghue is an Irish emigrant twice over: she spent eight years in
 Cambridge doing a PhD in 18th-century literature before moving to London, Ontario, where she lives
 with her partner and their two children. She migrates between genres, writing for screen and stage, but
 she is best known for her novels, which range from the historical (The Wonder, Frog
 Music, Slammerkin, Life Mask, The Sealed Letter) to the contemporary (Akin, Stir-Fry, Hood, Landing). Her
 international bestseller Room was a New York Times Best Book of the Year and a finalist for the Man
 Booker, Commonwealth, and Orange Prizes. Donoghue also wrote the screenplays for Room and The
 Wonder. Her next film (adapted with Philippa Lowthorpe from Helen Macdonald’s memoir) is H Is for
 Hawk.

                                                                                                                75
JADED                                                                                        January 2027




                                                                                     Literary Fiction
 Anne Meredith

Donna Tart meets E.L. James in a darkly seductive debut:
When a mysterious young woman comes between two
married professors, their carefully crafted cat-and-mouse
game crumbles, as prey becomes predator.

It’s the summer of 1986 on the Kelsey College campus. Sam and
Vera Ward got married decades ago and haven't slept together
since. With little desire to satiate Sam's sexual appetite, Vera
agrees to a certain tradition at the start of every school year. Sam
is allowed to sleep with one woman of his choosing, with two
ground rules: she must be a student at the college, and the affair
cannot last beyond a year. This year, their target is a mysterious
young woman named Jade who, unbeknownst to The Wards, is a
hand grenade poised to destroy everything they've carefully
built.

Alluring and sharp as a tack, Jade breaks all their rules. With a
plan of her own, she holds Sam in the palm of her hand, and Vera            Page Count: 368 pages
gripped in a dance of obsession and desire. What unfolds is not a           Territory: World
romance but a reckoning, where every touch conceals a move,                 Agent: Sarah Burnes, The
and every secret becomes a weapon, spiraling into an explosive              Gernert Company
ending that will leave Vera, Jade, and Sam completely undone.               Rights Sold:
                                                                            Vivat Publishing (Ukrainian)
Jaded is an electric, provocative novel about power, the abuse of           Simon & Schuster (UK)
and submission to it, in which each character is forced to confront         Urano (Spanish)
the messy web of complicity, lies, and lust in which they have,             Libri Kiado (Hungarian)
each, unwittingly entangled themselves.                                     S. Fischer Verlag (German)
                                                                            Callmann-Levy Editions
                                                                            (French)
                                                                            Grupo Editorial (Portuguese
                                                                            Brazilian)
                                                                            Newton Compton Editores
                                                                            (Italian)

                                                                            Manuscript Available


Anne Meredith is an American writer who has been writing for film and television for over thirty years.
Her credits include Bastard Out of Carolina, Losing Chase, and Out of The Ashes. She has won two WGA
awards for best adapted screenplay, as well as a Pen USA award and CableAce award. Jaded is her first
novel. She went to Bard College, and lives in the Hudson Valley.


                                                                                                           76
FAMILY MONEY                                                                                       Summer ’27




                                                                                               Fiction
 Elizabeth Bewley

Behind every great fortune is a marriage.

Twenty-something ingenue Violet Hill is finally experiencing life
outside of tv and film sets. On a perfect summer afternoon in the
French Alps, she meets a group of Americans: stylish, attractive,
monied. At the center of it all is a glamorous couple: John and
Sloane Jackson. John is a charismatic psychiatrist, and Sloane is
an heiress who wears her wealth with a casual shrug. Their life
together is enviable, but complicated, as Violet soon learns.

The Jacksons throw a lavish party at their chalet, and a brief
romantic encounter sparks a passionate affair that changes the
summer’s trajectory. John and Sloane’s beautiful life—shaped and
polished by Sloane’s family’s money—could all unravel. And Violet
may realize that there are some roles she was never meant to
play. Soaring through the inner lives of unforgettable characters,
this multi-layered story opens the doors to worlds of privilege                 Page Count: 313 pages
and ambition, to betrayal and love.                                             Territory: World English
                                                                                Agent: Sarah Landis, Sterling
A gilded drama for our times, Family Money is a modern day                      Lord Literistic
Tender is the Night, a glittering world of wealth, secrets, and rich
people behaving badly.

                                                                                Manuscript Available




Elizabeth Bewley is a literary agent at Sterling Lord Literistic. A graduate of Northwestern University,
Elizabeth lives outside of New York City with her husband and two sons.




                                                                                                                77
78
     NONFICTION




79
THE U.S. CONSTITUTION                                                                             May 2026

A Comprehensive and Annotated Guide for the Modern Reader
                                                                                         Politics
Melissa Murray

From a #1 New York Times bestselling author, podcast
host, and legal expert comes an accessible and modern guide
on how to read and understand the US Constitution.

Think of this as the US Constitution explained by America’s
favorite law professor, Melissa Murray. On her podcast, Strict
Scrutiny, Murray and her cohosts, Kate Shaw and Leah Litman,
provide in-depth, accessible, and irreverent analysis of the
Supreme Court and its cases, culture, and personalities.

On that podcast, on MSNOW—where she is a frequent
contributor—in opinion pieces, and when providing commentary
as she did in a recent New York Times piece on Justice Brown
Jackson, Murray spends an awful lot of time demystifying laws for
everyone else. In this book, she tackles one of the founding
American documents: the Constitution. Each amendment will be
annotated with some historical context provided, as well as
examples of how it is relevant to our present day.
                                                                           Page Count: 352 pages
More necessary than ever, as we look to the Supreme Court and              Territory: World English
their interpretation of the Constitution as the last institution           Agent: Jen Marshall, Aevitas
upholding our democracy, this book is an indispensable read for
every thinking American.

                                                                           Manuscript Available




Melissa Murray is the Frederick I. and Grace Stokes Professor of Law at New York University’s School of
Law. She is the coauthor of the #1 New York Times bestseller The Trump Indictments: The Historic
Charging Documents with Commentary, cohost of a top-ranked podcast, Strict Scrutiny—which is about
the Supreme Court and the legal culture that surrounds it—and a regular commentator on MSNBC. Her
writing appears regularly in major national publications, including The New York Times, The Washington
Post, Los Angeles Times, The Atlantic, Mother Jones, and The Nation. Following law school, Murray
clerked for Sonia Sotomayor, then of the US Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, and Stefan
Underhill of the US District Court for the District of Connecticut..


                                                                                                          80
SOMETHING WE SAID                                                                                  June 2026

Richard Pryor, a Notorious Word and Me
                                                                                            Memoir
 Elizabeth S. Pryor

Part memoir by the daughter of the iconic comedian Richard
Pryor, part exploration of the historical and contemporary use
of the N-word, this hybrid book peels back the curtain on the
life of Pryor and interrogates the most perplexing word in the
American lexicon, a word he helped popularize.

The N-word is one of the most perplexing, controversial and
misunderstood words in the American lexicon. It’s a word that
Elizabeth Pryor has not only contemplated, it’s one that she has
taught and observed up close.

When a white student quoted her father and blurted out the N-
word in the middle of a class she was teaching, Professor Pryor’s
worlds collided. In that moment, she was forced to confront the
history of the notorious slur in the United States, and her
complicated relationship with her father Richard Pryor, who
made the word a trademark of his comedy in the 1970s.

As she dives into her research, her own memories of the N-word                Page Count: 304 pages
come flooding back in unprocessed memories that she hadn’t                    Territory: World
thought about for decades. In reckoning with those memories,                  Agent: Tanya McKinnon
Elizabeth goes on a more public journey of discovery of the
messy and sometimes surprising legacies of racism in the United
States.
                                                                              Manuscript Available
A braided narrative that seamlessly integrates the history of the
N-word with Elizabeth’s own story of growing up the Black Jewish
daughter of Richard Pryor, Something We Said follows Elizabeth
as she becomes a leading scholar and teacher of the very word
her father put on the pop culture map.




Elizabeth Stordeur Pryor is a professor of history at Smith College where she teaches courses on race,
slavery, and one on her father, comedic legend Richard Pryor. She is the award-winning author of the
article “The Etymology of [N-Word]: Resistance, Language, and the Politics of Freedom in the
Antebellum North” and a 2016 monograph entitled Colored Travelers: Mobility and the Fight for
Citizenship before the Civil War. Her viral TED Talk on why it’s hard to talk about the n-word inspired her
forthcoming book—a hybrid memoir and historical exploration of the n-word. She grew up in Los Angeles
and now lives in Massachusetts with her husband Jerry Stordeur.

                                                                                                              81
GREAT AND UNFORTUNATE                                                                        August 2026



THINGS                                                                                    Memoir
 Jason Arday

With the power of Educated and the emotional sweep
of When Breath Becomes Air, Great and Unfortunate Things is
the inspiring, underdog story of how an autistic, non-verbal
boy who society had all but given up on found his voice,
literally and figuratively, became one of the youngest
professors in the University of Cambridge’s history and put
himself in a position to give back.

Jason Arday was born the second youngest of three boys and
grew up in a colorful and lively section of South London. At three
years old, he was diagnosed with autism and development
delays. Experts told his parents that he would never be able to
speak, write, or live independently. An institution would best
serve his needs, it was suggested.

His parents would have none of it. Instead, thinking outside the
box and drawing on her faith, his extraordinary mother Giff
embraced his neurodivergence and fiercely dedicated herself to
helping her son realize a potential few others believed was                Page Count: 288 pages
possible. Giff drew on proverbs from her West African culture,             Territory: World
popular music by the likes of Enya, and comedic television shows           Agent: Jennifer Gates,
and movies to help Jason make sense of the world.                          Aevitas Creative Management
                                                                           Rights Sold:
In Great and Unfortunate Things, we see how Arday went from                Dasan (Korean)
being nonverbal until he was eleven and illiterate until eighteen
to becoming a professor at Cambridge. Without romanticizing
the struggle, it’s a story of a son’s determination against
insurmountable odds and how his family and a band of ordinary
                                                                           Manuscript Available
people with extraordinary compassion joined forces to
encourage Jason to believe in himself and maximize his
capabilities.

This is the story we need right now, and Arday, who believes in
paying it forward, is the kind of figure the world can use more of
now more than ever.



Professor Jason Arday is a social commentator, presenter, and public speaker. He is currently the
Professorial Chair of Education (Sociology of Education) at the University of Cambridge, making him the
youngest-ever Black academic to hold a Professorship at Cambridge and one of the youngest academics
ever appointed to a Professorial Chair in Oxbridge’s one-thousand-year history.


                                                                                                          82
THE FORSAKEN FOUNDER                                                                     September 2026




                                                                                          History
Scott S. Greenberger
Uncover the little known story of Gouverneur Morris, the
brilliant yet overlooked Founding Father whose visionary ideas
from writing key components of the US Constitution to helping
create America's first bank to holding an unwavering stance
against slavery shaped the nation's future.

When George Washington and the Continental Army faced
starvation, he turned to Gouverneur Morris to help devise a plan to
provision the troops. When the fledgling nation needed a financial
system to sustain the Revolution, Morris again was called upon to
help design its first national bank and currency. When the
compromises between North and South, large states and small,
had to be stitched into a single governing document, the task of
shaping the Constitution’s final language fell largely to him. At the
Constitutional Convention, Morris spoke more often than any
delegate save James Madison—and more forcefully against slavery.
When Alexander Hamilton died in a tragic duel, his widow insisted
that Hamilton’s closest friend, Gouverneur Morris, deliver the
eulogy.
                                                                            Page Count: 368 pages
Morris continued to serve the republic after its founding—as envoy          Territory: World English
to France during the Revolution and Reign of Terror, and as an              Agent: Victoria Skurnick,
early visionary who grasped that New York, not Philadelphia, could          Levine Greenberg Rostan
become the nation’s economic capital if a canal opened the                  Literary Agency
interior to the sea. And yet, despite these achievements, Morris’s
legacy is little known today. In this deeply researched biography,
The Forsaken Founder, Scott Greenberger restores this
indispensable figure to history and asks why one of the most                Manuscript Available
prescient and principled founders faded from memory.

Moving from the battlefields of the American Revolution to the
salons of Paris and the blood-soaked streets of the French
Revolution, this book restores Morris to his rightful place in history.
It is the story of a man admired by giants, resisted by factions, and
ultimately forsaken by memory—and of a republic still grappling
with the truths he dared to speak.



 Scott Greenberger was a newspaper reporter for twelve years, first at the Austin American-Statesman
 and then at the Boston Globe. He's also written for the New York Times, the Washington Post, Politico,
 and GQ. Greenberger has a bachelor’s degree in history from Yale University and a master’s degree in
 international relations from George Washington University. He lives in Takoma Park, Maryland.

                                                                                                          83
WELCOME TO THE AFERLIFE                                                                     October 2026

 A No-Nonsense Tour for Those in Mourning or the Merely Curious
 with Denise, Heaven's Receptionist
                                                                                         Self-help
 Taryn Delanie Smith

From TikTok star Taryn Delanie Smith, a heartwarming
explanation of what to expect in the afterlife—from what there
is to do in heaven to what is our relationship to those we've
predeceased and those who passed before us—as explained
by the beloved, popular and wise-talking character Smith has
created, Denise, Heaven's Receptionist.

The afterlife seems like this big, scary, and complicated idea. Are
our loved ones able to see us? Do we get to pick our ghost
outfit? What happens to our pets?

Well, Denise is here to welcome us with open arms and give us a
tour of how the Upstairs works. With her signature humor and
care, she guides us through this heavenly realm and reveals a
place where love is the closest thing to magic.

From horseback riding to bingo to flying lessons, on Denise’s
tour we see how everyone finds their own way to enjoy the
afterlife. But she also addresses complicated questions, such as            Page Count: 96 pages
what happens when someone has unfinished business and how                   Territory: World
does the Upstairs take care of babies in the afterlife. She even            Agent: Kathleen Schneider,
introduces us to characters like Mr. Davis, who is on his way to            Lighthouse Literary
visit his family, and Laura, a new arrival comforted by Denise's
explanations. Step by step and room by room, Denise makes the
afterlife not seem so scary at all and reminds us the importance of
what we choose to do with our time on Earth. There’s even a visit
                                                                            Manuscript Available
from Tammy, everyone’s favorite ghoul.

THIS IS THE (AFTER)LIFE WITH DENISE, HEAVEN’S
RECEPTIONIST is not only a touching and funny look at what
comes after life, but it also offers a comfort to readers who are
dealing with grief by sharing how their loved ones are still with
them in spirit.




Taryn Delanie Smith grew up in Seattle and moved to New York City in 2018, working as receptionist.
She became Miss New York in 2022. She is a graduate of St. John’s University with a master’s degree in
communication and intercultural studies. She lives in Manhattan with her husband and their Great Dane,
Bruce.


                                                                                                         84
     FICTION




85
LIKE THE BITTER ORANGE                                                                             April 2027




                                                                                       Literary Fiction
 Milena Palminteri

For readers of the Ferrante novels, the Seven or Eight Deaths
of Stella Fortuna as well as the Sicilan classics by Tomasi da
Lampedusa and Sciascia, a novel about how one secret
upends the lives of three women across generations and
social movements.

Spanning forty years, from the twenties through the sixties, and
three generations, this runaway bestseller in Italy, Like the Bitter
Orange, introduces three generations of Sicilian women who
come up against, time and again, the limits of a society that
privileges men over women, a place where to be born a girl is to
be born unlucky.

There’s Nardina, who marries the noble Carlo Cangialosi but is
unable to bear him children. The wild and beautiful, yet poor,
Sabedda in contrast carries a child in her womb that she will not               Page Count: 448 pages
be able to care for. The paths of these two young women                         Territory: World English
intersect thanks to a devious plan that reeks of mafia-style                    Agent: Leeann Bortolussi,
complicity, hatched by Nadina’s mother and Don Calogero, a                      Giunti & Bompiani
ruthless farmer who aspires to a higher station. And there is
Carlotta who settles for working as an archivist for the city of
Agrigento, on Sicily’s southern coast, when her dreams of
becoming a lawyer, despite little precedence, are quashed by all
                                                                                Manuscript TK
around her.

It’s at work in the dusty archives that Carlotta finds a document
alleging that she is not the noble-born daughter of Carlos as she
always believed but possibly the child of Sabadda. Upon
confronting her family, an investigation is set into motion, one
that will take the reader from Italy in the 1940s as the black wave
of fascism descends over the country to the 1960s when female
empowerment only begins to find firm ground.

Just as the bitter orange, with its sour fruit is the most fertile plant
on which to graft the sweetest oranges, this stunning debut novel
shows how out of history that is often bitter and painful, comes
results that can be sweet and redemptive.

 Milena Palminteri was born in Palermo and currently lives in Salerno. There she directed the notarial
 archives, after having worked all her life as a conservator in the archives of Florence, Rome, Caltagirone,
 and Matera. Since 2014 she has been actively writing in the Lalineascrive workshops, hosted in Naples by
 author Antonella Cilento. Come l’arancio amaro is her first novel.

                                                                                                               86
Co-Agents
Brazil:                                           France:
João Paulo Riff                                   Pauline Cuchet
Agência RiffAvenida Calógeras n°6,                La Nouvelle Agence
sl1007 20030-070 -Centro                          60, rue Tiquetonne
Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brasil                        75002 Paris, France
Tel: 55 (21) 2287 6299                            Tel: (33) (1) 43.25.85.60
Fax: 55 (21) 2267 6393                            Fax: (33) (1) 43.25.47.98
Email: joaopaulo@agenciariff.com.br               E-mail: Pauline@lanouvelleagence.fr

Bulgaria, Albania, Romania, Serbia,               Germany:
Macedonia & Montenegro:                           Sebastian Ritscher Ronit Zafran
Mira Droumeva                                     Mohrbooks Literary Agency Hofackerstrasse
Andrew Nurnberg Associates Sofia jk. Yavorov      13a
bl. 56 - B, floor 1, ap. 9 1111 Sofia, Bulgaria   8032 Zurich, Switzerland
Tel: (359) (2) 986-2819                           Tel: (41) (43) 244-86-26
E-mail: anas@anas-bg.com                          E-mail: info@mohrbooks.com

China:                                            Greece:
Jackie Huang                                      John Moukakos
Andrew Nurnberg Associates International          JLM Literary Agency
Ltd. Beijing Representative Office                9 Andrea Metaxa Street 106 81 Athens,
Room 1705, Culture Square, No.59 Jia,             Greece
Zhongguancun Street                               Tel: (30210) 384-7187
Beijing Haidian District, 100872, China Tel:      E-mail: jlm@jlm.gr
(86) (1) 825-4106
E-mail: JHuang@nurnberg.com.cn                    Holland:
                                                  Paul Sebes
Croatia:                                          Sebes & Bisseling Literary Agency
Judit Hermann                                     Herengracht 623, 1017 CE Amsterdam
Andrew Nurnberg Associates                        The Netherlands
Budapest                                          Tel: (31) (20) 616 0490
Gyori ut 20                                       E-mail: sebes@sebes.nl
Budapest 1123, Hungary
Tel: (36) (1) 302-6451                            Hungary and Croatia:
Fax: (36) (1) 550-0080                            Andrew Nurnberg Associates Budapest
E-mailj.hermann@nurnberg.hu                       TartsayOffices1126 Budapest,
                                                  TartsayVilmosutca4.Hungary
Czech Republic, Slovakia, and Slovenia:           Tel: (36) (1) 302-6451
Marta Soukopova:                                  Fax: (36) (1) 550-0080
Andrew Nurnberg Associates Prague                 E-mail: rights@hungary.hu
Jugoslávských partyzánů 17
160 00 Praha 6, Czech Republic                    Israel:
Tel: 420 222 782 041                              Beverley Levit
E-mail: soukopova@nurnberg.cz                     The Book Publishers Association of Israel 29
                                                  Carlebach Street
Estonia:                                          Tel Aviv, Israel, 6713224 Tel: (972) (3) 561-
Tatjana Zoldnere                                  4121
Eastern European and Asian Rights                 E-mail: rights1@tbpai.co.il
Agency, Ltd.
P.O. Box 77, Riga 10011
Latvia
Tel: (37) (1) 750-6495
Fax: (37) (1) 750-6494
                                                                                            88
E-mail: zoldnere@anab.apollo.lv
Italy:                                     Poland:
Erica Berla                                Marcin Biegaj
Berla & Griffini Rights Agency via Gian    Andrew Nurnberg Associates
Giacomo Mora 7 20123 Milano, Italy         Warsaw
Tel. +39 0280504179                        ul. Mołdawska 9, 6th floor,
www.bgagency.it                            02-127 Warsaw, Poland
E-mail: berla@bgagency.it                  Tel: (00) (48) 228244181
                                           E-mail: marcin.biegaj@nurnberg.pl
Indonesia and Malaysia:
Santo Manurung                             Portugal and Spain:
Maxima Creative Agency                     Amaiur Fernandez
Beryl Timur No.41                          International Editors Co.
Gading Serpong – Tangerang 15810           Provenza, 276, 1st Floor
Indonesia                                  08008 Barcelona, Spain
Tel: 62-21-5421 7768                       Tel: (34) (93) 215-8812
Email: santo@maximacreativeliterary.com    Fax: (34) (93) 487-3583
                                           E-mail:
Japan:                                     amaiur.fernandez@internationaleditors.com
MikoYamanouchi
AyakoSasamoto                              Russia
JapanUNI Agency                            Olga Lutova
TokyodoJinbochoNo. 2 Building              Anastasia Falcón Arjarova Andrew Nurnberg
1-27 KandaJinbocho                         Associates Stroenie 6, 21 Tsvetnoy Blvd.
Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 101-0051, Japan          Moscow 127051, Russia
Tel: (81) (3) 3295-0301                    Tel: (7) (495) 625-81-88
Fax: (81) (3) 3294-5173                    E-mail: lo.lutova@lit-agency.com
E-mail: miko.yamanouchi@japanuni.co.jp     a.falcon@lit-agency.com
ayako.sasamoto@japanuni.co.jp
                                           Scandinavia (Denmark, Sweden, Norway,
Korea:                                     Finland):
Jae-Yeon RyuKCC (Korea Copyright Center)   Ulf Toregard
Gyonghigung-achim                          Ulf ToregardAgency
Officetel Rm 520, Compound 3               Vettekullavägen93-19
Naesu-dong 72, Chongno                     S-374 30Karlshamn, Sweden
Seoul 110-070, Korea                       Tel. + 46 708 123561
Tel: (82) (2) 725-3350                     E-mail: ulf@toregardagency.se
Fax: (82) (2) 725-3612
E-mail: jyryu@kccseoul.com                 Taiwan:
                                           Whitney Hsu
Latvia and Lithuania:                      Andrew Nurnberg Associates International
Tatjana Zoldnere                           Ltd. Taiwan Representative Office
Eastern European and Asian Rights          4F-7, No. 678, Sec. 4, Bade Road, Songshan
Agency, Ltd.                               Dist., Taipei 10566, Taiwan
P.O. Box 77, Riga 10011                    Tel: +886 2 2562 9008
Latvia                                     E-mail: whsu@nurnberg.com.tw
Tel: (37) (1) 750-6495
Fax: (37) (1) 750-6494
E-mail: zoldnere@anab.apollo.lv




                                                                                  89
Thailand and Mongolia:
Weerawat 'Big' Techakijjathorn
No. 1, Empire Tower, 47th Floor,
Unit 4709 (FD-03), Sathon Tai Road,
Yan Nawa Sub-district, Sathon District,
Bangkok 10120 Thailand
E-mail: big@nurnberg.co.th

Turkey:
Atilla Izgi Turgut & Begum Ayfer
Akcali Copyright Agency
Bahariye Cad. 8/9-10
34714 Kadikoy-Istanbul, Turkey
Tel: (90) 216-338-8771 or
(90) 216-348-5160
Fax: (90) 216-414-2265 or
(90) 216-347-6108
Email: atilla@akcalicopyright.com
begum@akcalicopyright.com

Vietnam:
Van Hoang
ANA Hanoi
No 7, D2, TT4 Bac Linh Dam,
Hoang Liet, Hoang Mai, Hanoi
Tel: +84-972947899
E-mail: van@nurnberg.com.vn




                                          90
