                         Kent Academic Repository

Arday, Jason, Belluigi, Dina and Thomas, Dave S.P (2020) Attempting to
break the chain: Reimaging Inclusive Pedagogy and Decolonising the Curriculum
within the Academy. Educational Philosophy and Theory . ISSN 1469-5812.




Downloaded from
https://kar.kent.ac.uk/81378/ The University of Kent's Academic Repository KAR


The version of record is available from
https://doi.org/10.1080/00131857.2020.1773257

This document version
Publisher pdf

DOI for this version


Licence for this version
UNSPECIFIED

Additional information



Versions of research works

Versions of Record
If this version is the version of record, it is the same as the published version available on the publisher's web site.
Cite as the published version.

Author Accepted Manuscripts
If this document is identified as the Author Accepted Manuscript it is the version after peer review but before type
setting, copy editing or publisher branding. Cite as Surname, Initial. (Year) 'Title of article'. To be published in Title
of Journal , Volume and issue numbers [peer-reviewed accepted version]. Available at: DOI or URL (Accessed: date).

Enquiries
If you have questions about this document contact ResearchSupport@kent.ac.uk. Please include the URL of the record
in KAR. If you believe that your, or a third party's rights have been compromised through this document please see
our Take Down policy (available from https://www.kent.ac.uk/guides/kar-the-kent-academic-repository#policies).
      Educational Philosophy and Theory




      ISSN: 0013-1857 (Print) 1469-5812 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rept20




Attempting to break the chain: reimaging inclusive
pedagogy and decolonising the curriculum within
the academy

Jason Arday, Dina Zoe Belluigi & Dave Thomas

To cite this article: Jason Arday, Dina Zoe Belluigi & Dave Thomas (2020): Attempting to break
the chain: reimaging inclusive pedagogy and decolonising the curriculum within the academy,
Educational Philosophy and Theory, DOI: 10.1080/00131857.2020.1773257

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/00131857.2020.1773257




       Published online: 04 Jun 2020.



       Submit your article to this journal



       View related articles



       View Crossmark data




                      Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
             https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rept20
EDUCATIONAL PHILOSOPHY AND THEORY
https://doi.org/10.1080/00131857.2020.1773257




Attempting to break the chain: reimaging inclusive pedagogy
and decolonising the curriculum within the academy
Jason Ardaya            , Dina Zoe Belluigib            and Dave Thomasc
a
 Department of Sociology, Higher Education and Social Inequalities, Durham University, Durham, UK;
b
 School of Social Sciences, Education and Social Work, Queen’s University, Belfast, UK; cStudent Success
Project, University of Kent, Chatham, UK


    ABSTRACT                                                                            ARTICLE HISTORY
    Anti-racist education within the Academy holds the potential to truly               Received 24 March 2020
    reflect the cultural hybridity of our diverse, multi-cultural society               Accepted 2 April 2020
    through the canons of knowledge that educators celebrate, proffer and
                                                                                        KEYWORDS
    embody. The centrality of Whiteness as an instrument of power and
                                                                                        Black; Asian and Minority
    privilege ensures that particular types of knowledge continue to remain             Ethnic (BAME); decolonising;
    omitted from our curriculums. The monopoly and proliferation of dom-                whiteness; race; racism;
    inant White European canons does comprise much of our existing cur-                 diversification; inequality
    riculum; consequently, this does impact on aspects of engagement,
    inclusivity and belonging particularly for Black, Asian and Minority
    Ethnic (BAME) learners. This paper explores the impact of a dominant
    Eurocentric curriculum and the Decolonising the Curriculum agenda
    within higher education and its influence upon navigating factors such
    as BAME attainment, engagement and belonging within the Academy.
    This paper draws on a Critical Race Theory (CRT) theoretical framework
    to centralize the marginalized voices of fifteen BAME students and three
    academics of colour regarding this phenomena. Aspects examined con-
    sider the impact of a narrow and restrictive curriculum on BAME
    students and staff and how the omission of diverse histories and multi-
    cultural knowledge canons facilitates marginalization and discrimin-
    atory cultures.




Introduction
Anti-racist education holds the potential to truly reflect the cultural hybridity of our diverse,
multi-cultural society through the canons of knowledge that educators celebrate, proffer and
embody (Peters, 2015). The centrality of Whiteness as an instrument of power and privilege
ensures that particular types of knowledge continue to remain omitted from our curriculums
(Tate & Bagguley, 2017). The monopoly and proliferation of dominant White European canons
comprises much of our existing curriculum and consequently impacts adversely on Black, Asian
and Minority Ethnic (BAME)1 learners’ engagement and sense of belonging. Within higher educa-
tion (HE) campaigns such as the Decolonising the Curriculum Movement and Why is my
Curriculum White have sought to challenge and dismantle the existing orthodoxies by



CONTACT Jason Arday            Jason.a.arday@durham.ac.uk      Department of Sociology, Higher Education and Social
Inequalities, Durham University, 32 Old Elvet, Durham DH1 3HN, UK.
Submitted to: Educational Philosophy and Theory.
! 2020 Philosophy of Education Society of Australasia
2     J. ARDAY ET AL.


advocating a curriculum that reflects the multiple histories of Black and indigenous populations
globally but particularly within the United Kingdom (UK).
   Anti-racist education in Britain provides a cornerstone for reconceptualising how knowledge is
proliferated and who should be the custodians of particular types of knowledge, particularly
within the classroom environment, where historically the gatekeepers to knowledge have often
resembled the White middle-class (Arday, 2019; Leonardo, 2016; Peters, 2015). Within the UK and
the Academy more generally, the liberal assumptions of multi-culturalism have been integral in
uncovering and dismantling the hidden power structures that are responsible for the inequality
and racism that pervades within institutions (Andrews, 2019; Leonardo, 2002). Educational institu-
tions, in particular, continue to be complicit in reproducing White privilege. The dearth of Black
and ethnic minority gatekeepers to knowledge in the Academy has been a contributing factor in
sustaining systemic racism and stereotypes against ethnic minority groups (Rollock, 2016). While
gaining traction regarding this issue continues to gather momentum nationally within the UK
and globally, the curriculum and pedagogies that pervade within our institutions continue to
remain a site for the systemic reproduction of racism (Pilkington, 2013).
   The absence of a curriculum that is reflective of an ever-increasingly diverse and multi-cultural
society continues to contradict and compromise the lofty egalitarian ideals often espoused by
universities. Consequently, such omissions are complicit in sustaining misinterpretations of BAME
individuals. There has been a continual silencing, racial minoritisation and ‘othering’ of non-
White people, which has inaccurately shaped the vernacular of this particular diaspora regarding
their contributions to world history and global society (Harris & Clarke, 2011). Unpacking this
becomes essential in exploring how these identities have been omitted pedagogically and why
new canons of knowledge are required in facilitating a more inclusive and representative canon
of knowledge. In acknowledging the centrality of Whiteness and how it saturates the Academy
there is a need for current gatekeepers of knowledge to relinquish the stranglehold and monop-
oly to knowledge creation and dissemination (Andrews, 2019). While the paucity of BAME aca-
demics within the sector remains evident, there is an emerging rear-guard action which has seen
people of colour who have historically resided on the periphery, now taking ownership of the
canon in attempts to diversify and decolonise existing the curriculum.
   The UK education system throughout its varying tiers (primary, secondary, further and higher),
in both policy and practice has often been accused of lacking a coherent conceptualization of
the dynamics of race and racism within its curricula (Heleta, 2016). The imbalance of a curriculum
that has not managed to stay abreast with an ever-increasingly diverse and multi-ethnic British
population remains problematic and continues in some way to be complicit in facilitating racial
inequality and disparities regarding academic achievement (Alexander & Arday, 2015). The lack
of scope and breadth regarding the curriculum suggests a monopoly in relation to the canon of
knowledges that comprise our curricula (Arday, 2019). This creates difficulties for learners
attempting to engage in a curriculum that reflects their history and lived experiences (Alexander
& Arday, 2015). The custodians of knowledge within the Academy have historically been White;
this has sometimes resulted in the shaping of a curriculum that heavily leans towards a
Eurocentric paradigm as the dominant knowledge canon (Andrews, 2019; Heleta, 2016). Often
this occurs in isolation from other historical, cultural and social contexts and factors that have
shaped the lexicon of the curriculum, particularly when considering the impact and contribution
of people of colour. Our digestion of knowledge is devised through various means but perhaps
one of the most notable ways is through the books we consume within educational spaces and
how we engage with diverse histories. The context which frames this is central to developing a
pedagogically inclusive learning space that fosters a sense of engagement and belonging (Shay,
2016). Despite notable shifts in decolonising our curricula there remains the need for a collated
and targeted focus to address the paucity of cultural diversity within our canons of knowledge
that in many ways sustain exclusion by omitting knowledge or sustaining dominant stereotypes
about ethnic minority groups (Shilliam, 2015).
                                                          EDUCATIONAL PHILOSOPHY AND THEORY      3


   This paper explores the impact of a dominant Eurocentric curriculum within higher education
and the influence of this upon navigating factors such as BAME attainment, engagement and
belonging within the Academy. Aspects examined consider the impact of a narrow and restrict-
ive curriculum on students who identify as belonging to a BAME background and how the omis-
sion of diverse histories and multi-cultural knowledge canons facilitates marginalization and
discriminatory cultures.
   This study centres the experiences of BAME learners within the Academy and aims to glean
their understandings of how the decolonising agenda has transpired within the sector and per-
haps more importantly whether this has positively impacted upon their learning experience,
attainment or engagement. There is also a need to explore perspectives regarding the potential
absence of a curriculum that embraces diversity and decolonisation in favour of a more central-
ised and dominant Eurocentric curriculum. Unpacking this context is paramount in de-centring
the dominant Eurocentric canon, which in many ways continues to facilitate forms of systemic
and sustained racism and educational exclusion (Shilliam, 2015).
   Importantly, this paper will argue that the centrality of a Eurocentric epistemology which
dominates the landscape of knowledge remains problematic in not reflecting the multi-ethnically
diverse histories within our society. The advancement and centring of such an exclusionary cur-
riculum, in many ways continues to remain a vehicle for the development of discriminatory
spaces and propagation of racial inequalities. In challenging the normative orthodoxies, this
paper attempts to advocate the benefits of a decolonised curriculum for all learners as a means
of navigating an ethnically diverse society by drawing on a Critical Race Theory (CRT) theoretical
framework to centralize the marginalized voices of 15 Black, Asian and Minority Ethnic students
and 3 academics of colour regarding this phenomenon. Exploring the need for diversifying the
canon also facilitates the need to examine and provide some conclusions on the role of
‘gatekeepers’ tasked with delivering knowledge and whether this endeavour has included the
pedagogical input of students and academics of colour.


Decolonising the curriculum within UK higher education
Within the UK there has been a continuing critical mass of students and academics that have
sustained calls to decolonise the curriculum and diversify the canon at universities ‘by ending
the domination of Western epistemological traditions, histories and figures’ (Molefe, 2016). In
particular, anti-racist scholar-activists have called for the end of dominant ideologies that pos-
ition white, male, Western, capitalist, heterosexual, European worldviews in higher education as
the dominant knowledge canon and discourse, in favour of more inclusive intersectional lexicon
that embodies global ‘perspectives, experiences and epistemologies’ as the central tenets of the
curriculum (Shay, 2016).
    Recent studies (Ahmed, 2012; Arday, 2018; Heleta, 2016; Shay, 2016) have continued to query
not only the lack of transformation in the higher education sector but also the mechanisms
which continue to sustain such an exclusionary curriculum. The inequitable cultural and struc-
tural mechanisms include poor diversification among academic staff and omitting students of
colour from curriculum design processes (Delgado Bernal & Villalpando, 2016). Thus, many efforts
to change the zeitgeist involve an inevitable disruption of whiteness. However, the centrality of
this phenomena occupies and monopolises much of the pedagogical practices that transpire
within the Academy (Leonardo, 2016). The centrality of the whiteness to be disrupted has been
firmly entrenched in an historical legacy that is deeply rooted, having been imposed through
colonial mechanisms as a ‘symbol of purity’ and claims to legitimate and verifiable knowledge
(Sardar, 2008). This whiteness in many cases can facilitate daily overt, covert and subtle racism
and the marginalisation of people of colour.
4       J. ARDAY ET AL.


   Nwadeyi (2016) argues that colonialism, segregation and other decisive vehicles for entrench-
ing white supremacy have impacted how educational spaces construct knowledge and the his-
torical contexts that comprise how the curricula is historically advanced and consumed. The
framing of Black histories and the systematic omission of their contribution to global society
facilitates an historic amnesia that creates a very narrow and constrained view of society and
more notably the actors that comprise these knowledge canons (Shay, 2016). The effects of this
continued marginalisation on academics and students of colour facilitates a learning space which
is not reflective of increasing diverse student populations (Tate & Bagguley, 2017). This is per-
haps symptomatic of the entrenched institutional racism which still influences much of the dis-
criminatory terrain in the Academy and society more generally (Shilliam, 2015).
   The beams of institutional racism continue to remain steady on a foundation of inequitable
structures that facilitate imbalances, discrimination and oppression. This continues to remain a
stumbling block for the proliferation of emancipatory pedagogies that provide a sense of identity
and belonging for students and scholar-activists of colour (Heleta, 2016). Within this context, des-
pite the lofty ideals of universities as egalitarian spaces, these institutions of higher learning
remain a significant barrier to culturally inclusive pedagogies that encompass the histories of
Black and indigenous people. As Sardar (2008) conceptualises:
    ‘If Western civilisation and culture are responsible for colonial racism, and Europe itself has a racist structure,
    then we should not be too surprised to find this racism reflected in the discourses of knowledge that
    emanate from this civilisation and that they work to ensure that structural dominance is maintained’.

   Historically, there are discriminatory patterns within universities which continue to point
towards a reluctance for ‘gatekeepers’ to open the canon to different bodies and traditions of
knowledge and knowledge-making in new and exploratory ways (Shay, 2016). While there have
been policies and frameworks that centre equality, equity, transformation and change (for
example Equality Act, 2010; AdvanceHE Race Equality Charter), institutional cultures and epis-
temological traditions have not considerably changed. The intention and willingness of policies
designed to readdress the balance regarding racial inequality throughout society continues to be
undermined by implementation procedures which are often not penetrative in dismantling
inequitable and institutionally racist structures (Ahmed, 2012; Alexander & Arday, 2015).
   The UK higher education system in many ways ‘remains a colonial outpost’ and its curricula,
reproduces hegemonic identities instead of eliminating hegemony (Heleta, 2016; Freire, 1970).
There is an argument to suggest that there is something profoundly wrong with an Academy
that facilitates curricula and syllabuses designed to meet the needs of colonialism while stifling
liberation (Mbembe, 2016). The suppression of an agenda that embraces inclusivity and a cur-
riculum that acknowledges our colonial and difficult past is important in reclaiming knowledge
and repositioning the narrative for a multi-cultural and diverse society (Alexander & Arday, 2015;
Arday, 2019). In these racially violent times, decolonising the curriculum becomes of critically
important in bringing about fundamental epistemological change within the Academy.


The impact of whiteness on the decolonising agenda
Dismantling the dominant discourse that pervades regarding this context requires in many ways
a disruption whiteness given its centrality with regards to decolonising the canon. The domin-
ation of this canon which has historically been the province of the white middle-classes warrants
contestation in attempting to better reflect an increasingly, diverse global Academy (Alexander &
Arday, 2015). Kelley (2000) states that this colonial domination has often been reflective of a par-
ticular disposition which advances an ideology that centres, defines and measures civilization in
very white, European terms. The advancement of such an exclusive ideology plays an instrumen-
tal role in promoting and imposing Eurocentric discourses and worldviews, while consequently
subjugating other bodies or forms of knowledge (Andrews, 2016). Thus, one of the most
                                                                    EDUCATIONAL PHILOSOPHY AND THEORY              5


destructive effects of colonialism was the subjugation of local knowledge and promotion of
Western knowledge as the ‘universal’ knowledge (Andrews, 2019). This endeavour sadly coincides
with efforts to erase the historical, intellectual and cultural contributions of Black and indigenous
populations and other parts of the ‘non-Western’ world to our common humanity (Shay, 2016).
    There has been a seamless advancement and centring of Western knowledge that transpires
at the expense of other knowledge canons which resides outside of the Eurocentric paradigm.
Shay (2016) explains that narrowing the curriculum in this way advances notions of whiteness
which extend beyond power and privilege by creating epistemologies and worldviews that are
situated in sometimes supremacist and nationalist, identity politics. Andrews (2019) argues that
such dispositions consequently impact the capacity to embrace and explore other cultural and
global perspectives that move away from the notion of Europe being the all-conquering contin-
ent and epicentre of knowledge. Such a discourse must also be interspersed with how global
colonization at the hands of many European countries resulted in the prolonged and sustained
oppression of Africans and other indigenous populations globally.
    The silencing and sedation of this ‘alternative’ knowledge reduces other bodies of knowledge
to little more than secondary and unimportant information that is considered to defame
Europe’s glorious historical past (C!  esaire, 2000). The dominant narrative proffered continues to
situate the colonised masses as inferior while promoting Whites as superior, heroic and pre-
servers of history (Mudimbe, 1985). Said (1994) adeptly notes that Western European literature
has for centuries portrayed the non-Western world and individuals within this diaspora as
‘inferior’ and ‘subordinate’. Unsurprisingly, this has contributed to the ‘normalization’ of racism
among colonialists in developing a notion that ‘Europe should rule, non-Europeans should be
ruled’ (Said, 1994, p. 8). The continual omission of a diverse curriculum that is reflective of a
multi-cultural society demonstrates a complicity by some universities to ensure that aspects of
curricula remain unapologetically Eurocentric (Zeleza, 2009). However, it also contradicts the
notion of the ‘liberal university’ that is a micro-cosm of our ethically rich and diverse society.
Universities and the curricula that resides within them remain complicit in facilitating the oppos-
ite of their intended charge to portray inclusion, equity and diversification. Universities reluctance
to abstain from undertaking a penetrative process of decolonising to address the shortcomings
of knowledge canons that are not reflective of multiple, diverse histories while engaging in sys-
tematic historical amnesia remains problematic at best and exclusionary at worst (Arday, 2018).
Pietsch (2013) conceptualises this by suggesting that:
   There is a presumption which sets a universality and superiority of ‘Western’ culture, compounded by
   ‘settler’ universities establishing themselves as the local representatives of ‘universal’ knowledge, proudly
   proclaiming this position in the neo-gothic buildings they erected and the Latin mottos they adopted.

    Through varying guises and reinventions higher education particularly within the West has
been designed to facilitate and entrench the power and privilege of the dominant white major-
ity, often at the expense of ethnic minorities that continue to remain on the periphery of the
Academy (Heleta, 2016). Encouragingly, the momentum gained from engaging in anti-racist and
exclusionary pedagogy has opened global debates concerning epistemological transformations
which entail a reorientation away from the colonial and dominant Eurocentric knowledge system
(Heleta, 2016).
    The sustained pressure is now mounting to dismantle a curriculum which has been weapon-
ised to sustain oppression and while stealthily and violently excluding ethnic minorities conflicts
with the ideal of an egalitarian and democratic curriculum that is inclusive of diverse knowledge
canons (Andrews, 2016; Shilliam, 2015). For the reasons tendered the charge to decolonise the
curriculum remains challenging because despite sustained and concerted efforts by anti-racist
educators and activists, the curriculum to a large extent is inextricably intertwined with aspects
of Empire and institutional racism within society and the Academy. Given that the latter remains
largely white and Eurocentric, current institutional cultures and structures are not conducive to
6     J. ARDAY ET AL.


substantial curriculum reform and destabilising the centrality of a dominant Eurocentric canon
(Shay, 2016).
    The dominance of this knowledge has historically monopolised the canon in most academic
fields of study (particularly in the humanities and social sciences). The narrowness of our current
curriculum facilitates a marginalization of our diverse and indigenous histories, by often uphold-
ing and maintaining patronising views and stereotypes about the Global South as impoverished
and economically deprived (Sardar, 2008). Such reductionist perspectives provide an all-conquer-
ing narrative of the Global North as superior. Such beliefs are entrenched within European and
supremacist values which continue in many respects to provide the basis for the curricula and
knowledge that our learners consume (Heleta, 2016). The Eurocentrism, which dominates the
curriculum and transpires throughout the Academy fundamentally, ‘seeks to universalize the
West and provincialize the rest’ (Zeleza, 2009, p. 133). Such exclusionary forms of education mini-
malizes diverse histories by not critically interrogating the outcomes of a history of patriarchy,
slavery, imperialism, colonialism, white supremacy and capitalism (Molefe, 2016).
    The shift away from a one-sided and subjective ‘epistemological truth’ promoted by those
attempting to maintain the status quo and resist a decolonising of the canon is a ‘reproduction
of epistemological blindness that silences other perspectives and ways of creating knowledge’
(Motta, 2013, p. 97). Pillay (2015) argues that this type of disposition is disabling and impacts
one’s ability to be able to integrate within a multi-cultural society. Further, Pillay states that such
pedagogies contribute to members of the Academy having an ignorant worldview or disposition
(in particular of the Global South). Further, they add that essentially this becomes another
weapon of racism and means of enacting ‘epistemic violence’ on Black and ethnic minority stu-
dents. In attempting to understand how this violence influences pedagogical ideologies and cur-
ricula, Spivak (1994) defines ‘epistemic violence’ as the Eurocentric and Western domination and
subjugation of the (former) colonial subjects. This definition provides a framework in attempting
to discern particularly though this lens how misconceptions are formed and sustained through
the Western knowledge canon. The nature of this violence resides in an imperialistic epistemic,
that is defined by social and disciplinary inscription (Spivak, 1994). The redeeming feature of epi-
stemic violence remains its erasure of history by building a narrative that Black and indigenous
populations have little to offer the ‘modern’ world (Shay, 2016). Molefe (2016) suggests that this
construct is built on a discourse that colonisers were enlightened and their worldviews built the
knowledge that we have come to know. The resistance to this disposition rejects the continued
enforced adoption of filtered histories which frame people of colour as inferior, consequently
positioning them on the periphery of history as second-class citizens.


Methodology
For the purpose of this study, fifteen BAME students and three academics of colour were
recruited from seven UK based-universities ranging from Russell Group2 to Post-92 institutions3.
Fifteen 60-minute semi-structured interviews (with BAME students) and one focus group inter-
view (with 3 academics of colour) were completed in attempting to glean perspectives on
aspects of decolonising the curriculum and an exploration of the potential for a more inclusive
pedagogy within higher education that is reflective of a diverse British society. The recruitment
of participants was facilitated through access to extensive BAME academic networks such as
Black British Studies Network and academic and professional communities that focus on greater
diversification within higher education.
    Initially, participants were enlisted through a purposeful sampling process which involved rec-
ommendations from several BAME colleagues. Social media platforms and engagement with
University Student Unions were also utilised to enlist and recruit BAME students. Additionally,
convenience sampling was used to diversify the pool of participants and responses to ensure
                                                          EDUCATIONAL PHILOSOPHY AND THEORY       7


that the sample was as representative as possible regarding the broad ethnic minority demo-
graphic within the sector to be considered (Cohen et al., 2011; Lamb et al., 2012). Throughout
the study all efforts were made to maintain participant confidentiality and anonymity by adopt-
ing pseudonyms and numbering participants throughout the study.
    The initial part of the study involved each participant being given an anonymous self-adminis-
trated questionnaire to complete which was deposited into a ballot box. The study was primarily
based on excerpts from the semi-structured interviews and focus group discussions which
included 17 participants from the following ethnic groups: Asian/Asian British (n ¼ 4); Black/Black
British (n ¼ 6); Mixed-Heritage (n ¼ 4) and Latin-American (n ¼ 3).
    The objectives of the study were explained to the participants, and informed consent was
obtained. Discussions were facilitated by the researchers who had experience in cross-cultural
working dynamics and qualitative methods. All interviews were audio-recorded and transcribed
verbatim. In addition to the recording discussions, written notes were also taken and flipcharts
were utilised for participants to engage in mapping and documenting patterns of thought
(Davies et al., 2009; Jones & Berry, 1986). Each participant was encouraged to speak and express
their experiences of engaging with a dominant Eurocentric curriculum that continually omits
Black, Asian and minority ethnic history that emanates from the Global South, and their enduring
impact on the Global North within a higher education context.
    Thematic analysis was conducted to identify key themes that were concurrent and commonly
emerged amongst the participants regarding their views on the decolonising the curriculum
agenda and the wider implications for issues such as belonging and attainment. The researchers
became familiar with the scripts and notes and developed an iterative coding scheme using
NVivo qualitative data analysis software. This process involved the identification of common
words and phrases expressed among the participants. These were coded and subsequently
grouped into themes and sub-themes to illuminate commonalities in experience. Transcripts
were coded according to theme. It is important to disclose that during the data review process,
new themes and sub-themes emerged and were adapted in an iterative process (Braun & Clarke,
2014; Cohen et al., 2011). Additionally, the analysis phase of this study was also informed by a
CRT framework that situates society as fundamentally stratified along racial lines (Hylton, 2012).
This framework remains an effective vehicle for education researchers seeking to pinpoint the
impact of racialized experiences on belonging and attainment (DeCuir & Dixson, 2004; Ladson-
Billings, 2009; Malagon et al., 2009).
    Establishing positionality and proximity to the research was essential in an attempt to
acknowledge and reduce researcher bias from an ethical perspective. There was some acknow-
ledgement that the researchers were closely associated with racialized discourses. Therefore,
some organic bias was inevitably inherent, although all protocols were administered to ensure
objectivity was maintained and any potential biases were minimised throughout the study
(Cohen et al., 2011). The researchers independently read the scripts and coded and analysed the
data to enhance the validity of the emerging themes and claims. Anonymised quotes from the
participants were used to illustrate pertinent themes identified within the study.
    The adoption of CRT within this study is an attempt to centre marginalized BAME voices that
often remain on the periphery. The interview design was informed by a critical race-grounded
methodology process (Malagon et al., 2009). This paper positions primary research data along-
side existing literature, by drawing on the emerging body of substantive pieces already con-
ducted on decolonising the curriculum and decentring dominant Eurocentric curricula in favour
of a more representative and inclusive pedagogy (Joseph-Salisbury, 2017; Tikly et al., 2004;
Williams, 2011). This study attempts to recognize the potency of a diverse, multi-cultural curricu-
lum and the inextricable link between purposeful learning experiences and attainment (Tikly
et al., 2004). The study undertaken attempted to demonstrate the need to move beyond restrict-
ive forms of curricula that endorse an exclusionary canon which continues to disadvantage peo-
ple of colour in the Academy.
8       J. ARDAY ET AL.


Dismantling the dominant eurocentric canon and decolonising the curriculum: Black,
Asian and Minority Ethnic (BAME) student and staff perceptions
This study identified three broad inter-related themes based on the perspectives of BAME stu-
dents and staff in relation to the lack of diversification within the curricula. The themes devel-
oped considered the following contexts within universities: (1) Feelings of belonging and
marginalisation within the curriculum, (2) The importance of a diverse and culturally broad cur-
riculum, and (3) The importance of a decolonised Curriculum for all. The themes identified were
comprised in an attempt to glean and illuminate the problematic nature of our current curricu-
lum, particularly for BAME students and staff attempting to establish a sense of belonging, com-
munity, history and inclusion.
   By highlighting participants’ experiences of a dominant Eurocentric canon, the excerpts pro-
vided argue for a more inclusive Academy in regards to knowledge dissemination and construc-
tion within our learning and pedagogical spaces. The need within the Academy to diversify the
canon, has coincided with a critical mass of scholar-activists attempting to illuminate the experi-
ences of individuals that remain on the periphery of an exclusionary Eurocentric curriculum.
Acknowledgment of the problematic nature of such an exclusionary curriculum could be posi-
tively consequential in regards to initiating sector-wide change through senior university stake-
holders and policy stakeholders. The explorations proffered in this paper provide a catalyst for
senior stakeholders and universities to draw on a robust body of narratives that focus on the
lack of diversification within our curriculum and the subsequent effect on BAME students
and staff.


Feelings of belonging and marginalisation within the curriculum
Through the interviews conducted in this study, as well as a review of existing literature, it
became clear that the curriculum in its current guise omits other bodies of knowledge associated
with BAME lived experiences. Leonardo (2016) suggests that the omission of other bodies of
knowledge besides the dominant Eurocentric canon denies Black and ethnic minority students
their identity and history. Further he suggests the importance of providing a curricula that
encompasses all histories in an unfiltered way that does not subjugate particular groups of peo-
ple. This claim is consistent with the findings of this research. Symptomatically, feelings of exclu-
sion and belonging within the curriculum were highlighted as a primary factor with regards to
feelings of marginalisation and exclusion from the learning space for both students and staff.
    In this section, participant perspectives focus on their experiences of learning within univer-
sities, with students recognising the patterns of exclusion and perhaps more importantly, how
this makes them feel:
    When you think about our curriculum it is actually very White and in many respects quite exclusionary. As a
    student of colour when you are sat in that space you feel it, you feel like none of this relates to me. When
    they (lecturers) do talk about Black people to be honest it is in quite bad and limiting terms … (Female,
    Mixed-Heritage, Student, 21).

   In this excerpt, the commonalities of students being racially minoritized through aspects of
the curricular has long been cited as a barrier towards promising attainment (Law, 2017;
Leonardo, 2016). In the excerpts that proceed, many of the experiences proffered speak to want-
ing see one’s self reflected in the knowledge provided in attempting to establish a sense
of belonging:
    As a student you are sat there and you are listening to a lecturer talk to you about race … who in many
    respects does not understand what it is like to be a person of colour. The contexts that are presented from
    a curriculum point of view in many cases speak to ignorant stereotypes about people of colour and this
    does create a sense of belonging in the classroom, if anything it makes you want not to be there. If you are
                                                                  EDUCATIONAL PHILOSOPHY AND THEORY              9


  not there it makes it hard to complete the assessments to the absolute best of your ability, and then you
  get poor marks. It’s a vicious circle … (Male, Black, Student, 4).

   A central theme in attempting understand these experiences for BAME students becomes cen-
tred around the ways in which knowledge is constructed pedagogically and the opportunities
afforded, particularly for students of colour to discuss contexts concerning race, racism and eth-
nicity. Leonardo (2016) suggests that learning spaces within the Academy continuously omit stu-
dents of colour by providing curricular that in many respects centres whiteness through a
dominant Eurocentric curricula. This resonates with the experiences of participants within this
study that cited feelings of exclusion within the learning space and curriculum:
  As a member of staff … particular one of colour, I am always keen to hear when students are not
  comfortable with the curriculum or what is taught … sadly I think what is problematic is the fact that
  students of colour feel excluded from the learning space and the curriculum more generally. Often, from
  my experience of working in universities for 23 years, BAME students’ opinions or insights are rarely sought
  after when designing curriculum content. This only exacerbates the feelings of exclusion for students of
  colour … (Female, Mixed-Heritage, Academic, 7).

   There was also a collective feeling that discussions concerning this discourse needed to con-
sider the reluctance to talk about issues of race and ethnicity in pedagogical spaces:
  The problem when you talk about decolonisation … particularly in a learning context … is that there is this
  really palpable feeling of uncomfortability, which can come from people not wanting to talk about race and
  racism. And when you do talk about it … you spend a lot of your time self-censoring trying to protect the
  feelings of some white people … who question the legitimacy of claims you are making about how race
  and racism has historically and presently affected people of colour … (Female, Black, Student, 2).

   The issues that pervade discussing aspects of race and racism became a prominent feature in
the discussions between academics and students concerning aspects of decolonising and diversi-
fying the curriculum. Many of the discourses presented resonated with a resistance to acknow-
ledge the racially discriminatory terrain and the impact this continues to have on ethnic
minorities. Such concerns can be situated within context of white fragility and the censorship
often undertaken by people of colour when discussing issues of race and racism
(DiAngelo, 2018):
  Talking about race and racism … and decolonising the curriculum is really difficult … especially in a
  classroom space. You are always thinking that as one of a few people of colour in that situation it is not
  really the right space to challenge a lot of discriminatory and racialized tropes and stereotypes that frame
  Black people as inferior to White people. Sometimes … lecturers can facilitate these exclusionary
  environments by the theorists they use and the images which often negatively portray us as Black
  people … (Male, Black, Student, 3).

   The excerpts provided illuminate the issues associated with belonging and marginalisation in
relation to participants’ experiences of engaging in a dominant Eurocentric curriculum that often
omits particular types of histories and lived experiences. The issue of censorship was a concur-
rent theme throughout this phase of the study. Many of the contexts proffered spoke to a gen-
eral reluctance by educators and universities to engage in meaningful and open discussions
about race and racism which de-centre whiteness and Eurocentrism as the dominant canon of
knowledge (Arday & Mirza, 2018; Leonardo, 2016). There was a consensus that the existing canon
oppresses and sterilises other histories and knowledge resulting in a non-inclusive pedagogical
environment for students and staff of colour (Ahmed, 2012; Law, 2017).


The importance of a diverse and multi-culturally broad curriculum
The importance of a diverse and multi-culturally broad curriculum was a central tenet through-
out the research study. For many of the participants the need for a curriculum that encompasses
broader knowledges and concepts that drew links between local, national and global histories
10        J. ARDAY ET AL.


which are able to reflect the varying diasporas, was felt to be absent in the ever-increasing
diverse university space:
     I go to a university that has a really diverse range of people … and a lot of the time I look at what I am
     studying in the classroom space, and think that this is in no way reflective of this mainly Black and ethnic
     minority community … and I think that is problematic because we are not learning about our lives,
     histories and contributions particularly in the UK context … (Female, Mixed-Heritage, Student, 13).

    It was felt among participants that the unpacking of various civilizations and histories that
move beyond a dominant Eurocentric curricula and surface level engagement of other indigen-
ous knowledge is integral to all individuals attempting to establish a broad, worldview that will
help individuals to circumnavigate a multi-cultural society. The views of academics’ within this
study suggested that a fundamental aspect towards progressing this endeavour needed to be
situated around developing the pedagogy of teachers. There was a collective sentiment prof-
fered that the capability and capacity to competently teach different knowledges and histories
particularly Black and ethnic minority history required bespoke and targeted training:
     One of the biggest issues that I encounter from my colleagues is sometimes the fear of being able to
     competently teach, facilitate and deliver aspects associated with race and racism. I think there is a
     pedagogical failing within university teacher training to prepare academics with the confidence to engage
     and successfully facilitate such topics. The alternative sadly in most cases … is that people stay away from
     these issues in a classroom context and this creates the type of dominant Eurocentric curriculum that
     excludes students of colour … (Female, Asian, Academic, 11).

    The pedagogical training of academics to be able to develop and deliver a more inclusive cur-
ricula was something considered to be easily achievable if universities were able to acknowledge
the need for decolonising the curriculum and the general benefits to all members of the univer-
sity community. Arday (2019) suggests that there is a direct correlation between the professional
development of academics and educators and their competence to engage in pedagogical inter-
ventions that involve decolonising curriculum. According to the participants, the evolvement and
mobilization of the decolonising agenda involves continuous engagement in a collaborative cap-
acity with both students of colour and all academics working collegiately on how this can be
facilitated and improved:
     I think that as a student of colour … I would really like to see more cross-collaboration between students
     and staff about decolonising the curriculum. I think with regards to this particular issue we may be better
     placed to advise academics on what they need to be doing to create more multi-cultural learning
     environments that allow us to see ourselves and our histories reflected in the curriculum … (Female,
     Mixed-Heritage, Student, 5).

   The need for developing an agenda which encourages academics and students to work more
collegiately on decolonising the curriculum was considered integral to broadening the canon
and moving beyond a dominant Eurocentric canon (Tate & Bagguley, 2017). This sentiment ech-
oes existing calls for BAME students to become a more integral part of the curriculum design
processes and the need for universities to acknowledge that existing curricula must be cognizant
and reflective of the ever-increasing diverse student populations. This builds on the work of
scholar-activists (D’Avray et al., 2013; Joseph-Salisbury, 2017; Shay, 2016) who suggest that edu-
cational spaces have an obligation to provide all learners with a culturally diverse and broad cur-
ricula required to navigate a multi-cultural society.


The importance of a decolonised curriculum for all
Among participants within the research, there was a consensus for discussions on decolonising
the curriculum to be situated within a discourse that extends beyond just the benefits for people
of colour. A central tenet that pervaded this thought was the need for all members within soci-
ety to know the diverse histories that encompass various communities. Through this particular
                                                                   EDUCATIONAL PHILOSOPHY AND THEORY               11


guise there was a feeling of establishing ways to redistribute the burden of this labour as histor-
ically this has fallen on people of colour, particularly women of colour:
   I think that this issue involves all of us, I think there is there perception sometimes … that these types of
   issues are ‘Black’ issues and very often we … especially women of colour are left to mobilise and drive this
   agenda even though it is collectively all our responsibility. The importance of a curriculum that benefits us
   all is central to creating something that is truly inclusive and reflective of us all … (Female, Black,
   Academic, 13).

   The perspective on collective responsibility regarding decolonising of the curriculum became
a strong theme throughout the study. Further, it was also felt that collective engagement was
needed throughout all levels of the university structure from an operational level through to
senior university leadership level. Participants noted that diversified curriculums at universities
provide the opportunity for the sector to truly be a reflection of equality, egalitarianism and
wider society (Arday, 2018; Arday & Mirza, 2018). Among the participants there was an appetite
for this movement to become a seminal moment and catalyst for change within the Academy:
   This movement speaks beyond just decolonising the curriculum. This is a very important moment which
   actually should allow us to reflect, evaluate and take stock of how the current and existing cultures within
   the Academy disadvantage Black and ethnic minority people. We can use the momentum gained from this
   movement to challenge and address other discriminatory issues in the sector … (Female, Mixed-Heritage,
   Academic, 12).

    The challenging of existing and current structures and cultures in the sector was a prominent
theme and there was a feeling that university institutions were fundamentally responsible for
the types of discriminatory cultures that existed. Tate and Bagguley (2017) state that the disman-
tling of existing discriminatory cultures within our university institutions is integral in building an
Academy that serves all members of the university community. Tate and Bagguley’s statement is
closely alignes with the above excerpt in regards to a consideration of how this seminal moment
could disrupt patterns of inequality throughout the sector. It also points towards what became a
reoccurring theme; the collective endeavour needed to ensure that inclusivity remains the cen-
tral stimulus for pedagogically diversifying our universities:
   We all need to make this our work, because we all benefit from an inclusive Academy. We need to create a
   space where people of colour feel like they belong. In university spaces … it is very sad when as a student
   of colour, when you do not feel like you belong in neither the curriculum nor the space more generally. If
   everyone saw the benefit of creating spaces of belonging for everyone, then I think this would go a long
   way to making people of colour feel like university spaces also belonged to them as well. And that is what
   this is really about. Belonging is about making all people feel like they belong … especially people of
   colour who are always on the outside of this space … (Male, Asian, Student, 16).

    This statement was particularly pertinent because it spoke to the need for a re-evaluation of
the current structures within our universities that continually oppress particularly minority groups
intersectionally, with specific reference to BAME students in this particular context. The concur-
rent themes throughout this study resonated with a need to pedagogically engage staff and stu-
dents in decolonising the curriculum and thinking about the benefits to all members of the
Academy to have a diversified canon of knowledge that encompasses diverse histories and con-
tributions. The salient thread within this discourse and the corpus of literature utilised through-
out emphasises the need for universities to engage more collaboratively with BAME students in
attempting to provide curricula that embraces diversification and reflects the hybridity of our
multi-cultural society.


Conclusion and recommendations
The decolonisation movement within higher education continues to gather momentum as it
gradually decentres dominant Eurocentric curricula while attempting to address the epistemic
12     J. ARDAY ET AL.


violence of colonial knowledge and colonial thought (Pillay, 2015). Higher education as a sector
requires a reconceptualization of claims to knowledge that engage with other historical and
pedagogical canons. The potential for a curriculum that embraces diversification ultimately
equips communities of learners with the intellectual capital to counter the overt and insidious
forms of epistemic violence (Pillay, 2015). In such racially violent times attempting to exhume
our multi-diverse histories from the annals of a dominant White Eurocentric curriculum becomes
essential in creating spaces for indigenous histories, particularly from the Global South as exist-
ing and emerging scholar-activists continue to rewrite our histories which have been so cruelly
silenced and oppressed by the legacy of colonialism (Zeleza, 2009). The default position adopted
within the Academy still positions Western knowledge systems as the singular basis for higher
forms of thinking (Andrews, 2016). Thus, the involvement of white allies in the decolonisation
project is essential and requires a reflexivity and a decentring of whiteness that repositions eth-
nic minority individuals from the margins to the centre (Langdon, 2013).
    Involvement in diversifying the existing canon requires a recognition of privilege, capital and
essentially an unlearning or disrupting of knowledge saturated in historical amnesia and carefully
curated colonial histories designed to subjugate and exploit ‘the other’. The epistemological
transformation of the Academy and the decolonisation of the curriculum requires targeted inter-
ventions such as PhD Studentships for aspiring ethnic minority scholars to diversify academic
communities and pedagogical input within university institutions (Leading Routes, 2019).
Importantly, such an endeavour goes beyond just diversifying academic workforces. As such
action alone does not necessarily guarantee penetrative and fundamental change. Targeted
interventions by senior leadership stakeholders require substantial paradigm shifts, which dis-
mantle existing cultural and structural racist practices that continually oppress and marginalise, if
the Academy is to engage in meaningful decolonisation of the curriculum, its academics and
existing content (Langdon, 2013).


Developing an awareness of our curriculum and its impact on black and minority
ethnic learners
Direct colonial rule may have disappeared; but colonialism, in its many disguises as cultural, eco-
nomic, political and knowledge-based oppression still transpires throughout all of society’s major
institutions (Sardar, 2008). As the decolonisation movement continues to gather momentum
within the Academy, there must be an awareness that if universities and academics want to
genuinely contribute to the pedagogical transformation of a more diverse curriculum, then there
must be a profound recognition of what is taught and how this can be modified in diversifying
the canon. In its current guise the Eurocentric curriculum, intertwined with epistemic violence –
does not contribute to a much-needed reimagining of the past and shaping of the present and
future within our multi-ethnic society (Leonardo, 2016). The actualization of this charge can only
transpire through a curriculum that accurately reconstructs the negative narrative that pervades
the Global South while providing an unfiltered enumeration regarding the atrocities of Empire
from a historical, civilizational, political economy and political standpoint perspective (Law, 2017;
Tate & Bagguley, 2017).
   The opposition to change is deeply entrenched within the fabric of university structures
because it disrupts the centrality of whiteness and the power and privilege that encompass this
(Andrews, 2016). The ceasing of power, privilege, influence and decision-making upon this phe-
nomena will require a dismantling of the Master’s House to ensure a pathway through for all
who wish to engage in a more inclusive and less oppressive pedagogy. The inevitable rejection
of anti-racist pedagogy will involve navigating an inevitable fragility and resistance from academ-
ics who wish for the canon to remain the same, unchanged and uncontested. Fundamentally,
such reactions will continue to be typical to any intellectual challenges to existing oppressive
                                                          EDUCATIONAL PHILOSOPHY AND THEORY        13


pedagogies that create a province for particular types of ‘gatekeepers’ to maintain a monopoly
on the types of knowledge to be proffered, legitimised and celebrated (Heleta, 2016). Thus,
debates about decolonisation create discomfort within universities, particularly among some
senior stakeholders and academics that have an overwhelming desire to celebrate and filter the
effects of Empire and the Colonial oppression, enslavement and brutality that ensued at the
expense of Black and indigenous people globally (Shay, 2016). The need for systemic change
benefits all members of the academic community and strengthens our bodies of knowledge
when differing narratives comprise these canons. The labour of the decolonisation agenda can-
not be left solely to BAME scholar activists, particularly women of colour who have historically
and unfairly carried this burden often without acknowledgement, professional progression or
remuneration.


The need for a collective effort in decolonising the curriculum
A collective and concerted effort is required to redesign our curriculum to provide something
that engages inclusively, as these differing histories are required for successful navigation in a
truly multi-cultural global society. The disrupting of the status quo with regarding to racial
inequality and discrimination within the Academy is inevitably emotionally, mentally and phys-
ically exhausting. The mobilization of social and structural change seldom happens throughout
history without the instruments of activism, advocacy, dissent, disruption and protest
(Langdon, 2013). The cohesiveness of such a powerful resistance is predicated on a sound
rational for developing a curriculum that allows students to engage with a plethora of per-
spectives. There is a sadness that naturally ensues as historically senior leaders within univer-
sities have been complicit in supressing and ignoring calls for a more diverse curriculum, with
action now only occurring because of the exerted pressure to do so by social movements
and campaigns.
    While progressive students and academics continue to enforce the need for change by con-
tinuing to hold senior stakeholders accountable in trying to create more inclusive cultures and
transformative university institutions, the Academy must not become complacent and solely rely
on this unremunerated labour. Universities have reached a critical juncture in relation to the
decolonising movement, in that there is an opportunity to actively involve and integrate stu-
dents of colour in the process of curriculum transformation, teaching and learning. An agency
that has previously and historically not been afforded to students of colour. Freire (1996) concep-
tualises the educational space as a platform for students and educators to work cohesively on
unveiling the reality, understanding it critically and recreating new bodies of knowledge in the
process. In such discriminatory and violent times the process of constructing knowledge requires
reclaiming space in attempting to capture an entirely different narrative that focuses on the posi-
tive contributions of people of colour historically as a critical act in developing emancipa-
tory pedagogies.
    Radical departures from normative orthodoxies are challenging for all stakeholders involved.
They are always simultaneously symbolic and visceral. The potential dawn of a curriculum that
moves beyond the solely Eurocentric canon opens up new possibilities for questioning what has
largely remained unquestioned within the Academy (Mbembe, 2016). The movement to trans-
form and decolonise higher education has now established a global foothold where a coalition
of students and educators have become anti-racist activists in attempting to endorse a decolon-
isation of the curriculum. As scholar-activists there is a need for us to continue to hold university
institutions accountable by maintaining non-violent, intellectual and evidence-based discourses,
which attempt to de-centre Eurocentrism and dismantle epistemic violence within the Academy
in attempting to envision something truly inclusive.
14       J. ARDAY ET AL.


Notes
1. Commentators suggest the use of precise descriptions regarding the ethnic background when describing
   research findings (Bradby 2003; McKenzie & Crowcroft, 1996). For the purposes of this paper, the term Black,
   Asian and Minority Ethnic and the abbreviation BAME will be used to refer to people who are from ethnic
   backgrounds other than white British (including Black African, African Caribbean, Asian, Latin-American, and
   other minority ethnic communities) with more precise descriptions used where appropriate. There is a
   recognition, however, that the term BAME is not universally accepted in spite of its use within the British
   vernacular. It is important to acknowledge that the term BAME, despite its widespread use, has severe
   limitations and usually follows non-specific quantifiers such as ‘most’ or ‘some’ (Glover & Evison, 2009).
   Typically, there has been an accepted use of the term BAME, which has been illustrated in research and
   Government papers. Given the purpose of this paper, this term is applied purely as a descriptive term having
   been the preferred term for most of the participants throughout this study.
2. ‘The Russell Group is a self-selected association of 24 public research universities in the United Kingdom. The
   group is headquartered in London and was established in 1994 to represent its members’ interests principally
   to Government and Parliament. Representing the UK’s leading universities, the Russell Group has historically
   been committed to maintaining its status as research intensive in addition to having unrivalled links with
   business and the public sector (The Russell Group 2018).
3. New University, synonymous with Post-1992 University or modern university, is a former polytechnic or central
   institution in the United Kingdom that was given university status through the Further and Higher Education
   Act 1992 or an institution that has been granted university status since 1992 without receiving a royal charter
   (Armstrong 2008).


Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.


Notes on contributors
Dr Jason Arday is an Assistant Professor in Sociology at Durham University in the Department of Sociology. He is a
Visiting Research Fellow at The Ohio State University in the Office of Diversity and Inclusion, a Research Associate
at Nelson Mandela University in the Centre for Critical Studies in Higher Education Transformation and a Trustee of
the Runnymede Trust, the UK’s leading Race Equality Thinktank. Jason is also a Trustee of the British Sociological
Association (BSA). He sits on the Centre for Labour and Social Studies (CLASS) National Advisory Panel and is a
School Governor at Shaftesbury Park Primary School in London. Jason’s research focuses on Race, Education,
Intersectionality and Social Justice. He sits on the following trade union equality committees; Trade Union
Congress (TUC) Race Relations Committee; University and College Union (UCU) Black Members’ Standing
Committee and the UK Council for Graduate Education (UKCGE) Working Group on BME Participation in
Postgraduate Research. Jason is also part of the Universities UK Advisory Group on tackling racial harassment of
students. He is a Graduate of the Operation Black Vote (OBV) MP Parliamentary Scheme, a scheme focused on
unearthing the next generation of ethnic minority Parliamentarians. Jason is the author of the following titles:
Considering Racialized Contexts in Education: Using Reflective Practice and Peer-Mentoring to support Black and Ethnic
Minority educators (Routledge); Being Young, Black and Male: Challenging the dominant discourse (Palgrave); and
Exploring Cool Britannia and Multi-Ethnic Britain: Uncorking the Champagne Supernova (Routledge). He is the Co-
Editor of the highly acclaimed Dismantling Race in Higher Education: Racism, Whiteness and Decolonising the
Academy (Palgrave) with Professor Heidi Mirza (Goldsmiths, University of London). Jason also serves on the Editorial
Boards of Educational Philosophy and Theory; and the British Sociological Association (BSA) journal Sociology.

Dr Dina Zoe Belluigi’s work relates to the agency and ethico-historical responsibility of artists and academics in
contexts undergoing transitions in author-ity. For the most part, this has related to the development of artists and
academics as change-agents and critical consciousness in South Africa post-1994; extending more recently to draw
from insights of those within women’s studies in India, and in dialogue with academics in exile from Syria. Dina
draws from transdisciplinary orientations in critical theory, including literary theory informed by postcolonial and
feminist re-animation of ‘situating the author’ within interpretation, to consider ways in which research, teaching
and artmaking may enable re-authoring, commemoration and archiving of histories and current experiences of
inequality, and legacies of post conflict, towards changing systems of oppression. Dr Dina Zoe Belluigi is an aca-
demic in Critical Higher Education Studies at Queen’s University Belfast, Northern Ireland. Prior to this, she was a
Senior Lecturer at Rhodes University in South Africa, and continues formal affiliation with her country as a research
associate at Nelson Mandela University. She sits on a range of editorial boards on higher education studies and
                                                                       EDUCATIONAL PHILOSOPHY AND THEORY               15


creative arts higher education; and contributes to policy-formation, such as in her current role as a member of UK
Research and Innovation’s External Advisory Group for Equality, Diversity and Inclusion.

Dave Thomas is an an Occupational Therapist and Public Health Specialist, with a remit in social justice. He is also
a member of the World Federation of Occupational Therapists, Royal College of Occupational Therapists and Royal
Society of Public Health. Additionally, Dave is the Equalities Officer for the University of Kent UNISON branch. He is
a founder and co-Chair of the University of Kent’s Black, Asian and Minority Ethnic (BAME) Staff Network. Dave is
currently employed as a Project Manager on the institutionally funded Student Success Project at the University of
Kent. Dave is reading for a PhD in higher education and is interested in how Westernised ontology, epistemology
and pedagogy shape educational trajectories, outcomes and interest for students from racially minoritised back-
grounds in higher education.


ORCID
Jason Arday     http://orcid.org/0000-0002-9822-1068
Dina Zoe Belluigi    http://orcid.org/0000-0003-4005-0160


References
Ahmed, S. (2012). On being included: Racism and diversity in institutional life. Duke University Press.
Alexander, C., & Arday, J. (2015). Aiming higher race, inequality and diversity in the academy. AHRC: Runnymede
   Trust, (Runnymede Perspectives). London, Common Creative: Runnymede Trust, (Runnymede Perspectives).
Andrews, K. (2016). Black studies university course long overdue. https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/
   may/20/black-studies-university-course-long-overdue
Andrews, K. (2019). Blackness, Empire and migration: How Black Studies transforms the curriculum. Area, 10, 1–7.
Arday, J. (2018). Dismantling power and privilege through reflexivity: negotiating normative Whiteness, the
   Eurocentric curriculum and racial micro-aggressions within the Academy. Whiteness and Education, 3(2), 141–161.
   https://doi.org/10.1080/23793406.2019.1574211
Arday, J. (2019). The black curriculum: Black British history in the national curriculum report. The Black Curriculum.
Arday, J., & Mirza, H. (eds.). (2018). Dismantling race in higher education: Racism, whiteness and decolonising the
   academy. Palgrave Macmillan.
Armstrong, C. (2008). What is a University in the UK? https://web.archive.org/web/20100513000141/http://www.jobs.
   ac.uk/careers/articles/1135/what-is-a-university-in-the-uk/
Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2014). What can ‘thematic analysis’ offer health and wellbeing researchers? International
   Journal of Qualitative Studies on Health and Wellbeing, 9(2), 121–132.
Ce!saire, A. (2000). Discourse on colonialism. Monthly Review Press.
Cohen, L., Manion, L., & Morrison, K. (2011). Research methods in education, 7th ed. Routledge.
D’Avray, D., Eales, J., Fulbrook, M., McLay, K., Mandler, P., Scott, H. (2013). Plan for history curriculum is too focused
   on Britain. The Observer letters page, 16 February. http://www.theguardian.com/
Davies, B., Larson, J., Contro, N., Reyes-Hailey, C., Ablin, A. R., Chesla, C. A., Sourkes, B., & Cohen, H. (2009).
   Conducting a qualitative culture study of pediatric palliative care. Qualitative Health Research, 19(1), 5–16.
   https://doi.org/10.1177/1049732308327346
DeCuir, J. T., & Dixson, A. D. (2004). So when it comes out, they aren’t that surprised that it is there’: Using Critical
   Race Theory as a tool of analysis of race and racism in education. Educational Researcher, 33(5), 26–31. https://
   doi.org/10.3102/0013189X033005026
Delgado Bernal, D., & Villalpando, O. (2016). An apartheid of knowledge in academia. In E. Taylor, D. Gillborn, & G.
   Ladson-Billings (Eds.), Foundations of critical race theory in education (2nd ed., pp. 72–92). Routledge.
DiAngelo, R. (2018). White fragility: Why it’s so hard for white people to talk about racism. Beacon Press.
Freire, P. (1970). Pedagogy of the oppressed, 30th ed. The Continuum International Publishing Group Inc.
Freire, P. (1996). Pedagogy of the oppressed. Penguin.
Glover, G., & Evison, F. (2009). Use of new mental health services by ethnic minorities in England. North East Public
   Health Observatory.
Harris, R., & Clarke, G. (2011). Embracing diversity in the history curriculum: A study of the challenges facing trainee
   teachers. Cambridge Journal of Education, 41(2), 159–175. https://doi.org/10.1080/0305764X.2011.572863
Heleta, S. (2016). Decolonisation of higher education: Dismantling epistemic violence and Eurocentrism in South
   Africa. Transformation in Higher Education, 1(1), 1–8. https://doi.org/10.4102/the.v1i1.9
Hylton, K. (2012). Talk the talk, walk the walk: Defining critical race theory in research. Race Ethnicity and Education,
   15(1), 23–41. https://doi.org/10.1080/13613324.2012.638862
16       J. ARDAY ET AL.


Jones, G., & Berry, M. (1986). Regional secure units: the emerging picture. In G. Edwards (ed.), Current issues in clin-
    ical psychology IV. Plenum Press.
Joseph-Salisbury, R. (2017). Black mixed-race male experiences of the UK secondary school curriculum. Journal of
    Negro Education, 10(7), 1–31.
Kelley, R. D. G. (2000). A poetics of anti-colonialism. In A. C!esaire (ed.), Discourse on colonialism (pp. 7–28). Monthly
    Review Press.
Ladson-Billings, G. (2009). Critical race theory in education. In M. Apple, W. Au, & A. Gandin (eds.), The Routledge
    international handbook of critical education (pp. 110–122). Routledge.
Lamb, J., Bower, P., Rogers, A., Dowrick, C., & Gask, L. (2012). Access to mental health in primary care: a qualitative
    meta-synthesis of evidence from the experience of people from ’hard to reach’ groups. Health (London, England
    : 1997)), 16(1), 76–104. https://doi.org/10.1177/1363459311403945
Langdon, J. (2013). Decolonising development studies: Reflections on critical pedagogies in action. Canadian
    Journal of Development Studies, 34(3), 384–399.
Law, I. (2017). Building the Anti-racist University, action and new agendas. Race Ethnicity and Education, 20(3),
    332–343. https://doi.org/10.1080/13613324.2016.1260232
Leonardo, Z. (2002). The souls of white folk: Critical pedagogy, whiteness studies, and globalization discourse. Race
    Ethnicity and Education, 5(1), 29–50. https://doi.org/10.1080/13613320120117180
Leonardo, Z. (2016). The color of supremacy. In E. Taylor, D. Gillborn, & G. Ladson-Billings (eds.), Foundations of crit-
    ical race theory in education (2nd ed., pp. 265–277). Routledge.
Malagon, M. C., Huber, L. P., & Velez, V. N. (2009). Our experiences, our methods: Using grounded theory to inform
    a critical race theory methodology. Seattle Journal of Social Justice, 21(8), 253–272.
Mbembe, A. (2016). Decolonising the university: New directions. Arts & Humanities in Higher Education, 15(1), 29–45.
McKenzie, K., & Crowcroft, N. S. (1996). Describing race, ethnicity, and culture in medical research. BMJ Open,
    312(7038), 1054–1025. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.312.7038.1054
Molefe, T. O. (2016). Oppression must fall: South Africa’s revolution in theory. World Policy Journal, 33(1), 30–37.
    https://doi.org/10.1215/07402775-3545858
Motta, S. C. (2013). Teaching global and social justice as transgressive spaces of possibility. Antipode, 45(1), 80–100.
Mudimbe, V. Y. (1985). African gnosis philosophy and the order of knowledge: An introduction. African Studies
    Review, 28(2/3), 149–233. https://doi.org/10.2307/524605
Nwadeyi, L. (2016). We all have a responsibility to disrupt the status quo. Mail & Guardian, http://mg.co.za/article/
    2016-06-29-we-allhave-agency-and-we-must-use-it-to-disrupt-the-status-quo
Peters, M. A. (2015). Why is My Curriculum White? Educational Philosophy and Theory, 47(7), 641–646. https://doi.
    org/10.1080/00131857.2015.1037227
Pietsch, T. (2013). Empire and higher education internationalisation, University World News, http://www.university-
    worldnews.com/article.php?story=20130718115637589
Pilkington, A. (2013). The interacting dynamics of institutional racism in higher education. Race Ethnicity and
    Education, 16(2), 225–245. https://doi.org/10.1080/13613324.2011.646255
Pillay, S. (2015). Decolonising the university, Africa is a Country. http://africasacountry.com/2015/06/decolonizing-
    the-university/
Rollock, N. (2016). How much does your university do for racial equality? https://www.theguardian.com/higher-educa-
    tion-network/2016/jan/19/how-much-does-your-university-do-for-racial-equality/
Said, E. (1994). Culture and imperialism. Vintage.
Sardar, Z. (2008). Foreword to the 2008 edition. I think it would be good if certain things were said: Fanon and the
    epidemiology of oppression. In F. Fanon (ed.), 1967, Black skins, White masks (2008 ed., pp. vi–xx). Pluto Books.
Shay, S. (2016). Decolonising the curriculum: It’s time for a strategy. The Conversation. https://theconversation.com/
    decolonisingthe-curriculum-its-time-for-a-strategy-60598
Shilliam, R. (2015). Black Academia in Britain. The Disorder of Things. https://thedisorderofthings.com/2014/07/28/
    black-academia-in-britain/
Spivak, G. C. (1994). Can the subaltern speak?. In P. Williams & L. Chrisman (eds.), Colonial discourse and post-colo-
    nial theory: A reader (pp. 66–111). Harvester/Wheatsheaf.
Tate, S. A., & Bagguley, P. (2017). Building the anti-racist university: next steps. Race Ethnicity and Education, 20(3),
    289–299. https://doi.org/10.1080/13613324.2016.1260227
The Russell Group. (2018). What are we about? https://russellgroup.ac.uk/about/
Tikly, L., Caballero, C., Haynes, J., & Hill, J. (2004). Understanding the educational needs of mixed-heritage pupils.
    Department for Education and Skills.
Zeleza, P. T. (2009). African studies and universities since independence: The challenges of epistemic and institu-
    tional decolonization. Transition, 23(101), 110–135. https://doi.org/10.2979/trs.2009.-.101.110
