Ruling Passions: A Research Informed Handbook
BAILEY, Christopher <http://orcid.org/0000-0003-1969-5001>
Available from Sheffield Hallam University Research Archive (SHURA) at:
https://shura.shu.ac.uk/35475/




This document is the Published Version [VoR]
Citation:
BAILEY, Christopher (2023). Ruling Passions: A Research Informed Handbook.
https://rulingpassions.wordpress.com/. [Other]



Copyright and re-use policy
See http://shura.shu.ac.uk/information.html




                  Sheffield Hallam University Research Archive
                               http://shura.shu.ac.uk
 Ruling Passions
  a research informed handbook




Dr. CHRIS BAILEY, SHEFFIELD HALLAM UNIVERSITY
    www.rulingpassions.wordpress.com
2
Ruling Passions
A ‘research informed handbook’ made for
the ESRC Festival of Social Sciences in
November 2023




Dr. Chris Bailey, Sheffield Hallam University
    www.rulingpassions.wordpress.com




4
Contents
       Introduction........................................ 7-9
         ‘Special Interests’.......................... 10-11
     The project......................................... 12-13
      The participants................................ 14-41
                     Laura.............................. 16-17
                 Kate.................................... 18-19
                     MEJ................................ 20-21
                     Robert............................ 22-23
                     Ashley............................. 24-25
                    Graham........................... 26-27
                        Ben.............................. 28-29
                          Ian............................. 30-31
                    P....................................... 32-33
                   Catharine.......................... 34-35

                                                                     5
                          Avery........... 36-37
                     Emma............... 38-39
                 Solange................. 40-41
     Themes and Findings......... 42–50
           Wellbeing.................... 43-44
           Identity........................ 45-46
           ND Literacies............... 47-48
           Meaning Making......... 49-50
    Summary................................... 51
    Gallery.................................. 52-55
    Podcast................................. 56-57
    Next Steps................................. 58
    Glossary..................................... 59
    References................................. 60
    About the researcher................. 61
    Acknowledgements................... 62
6
Introduction

Take a moment to think about what really interests
you. Do you have a particular interest or hobby that
enriches your life?
This fascination might have its origins in your childhood,
or it could be a recent development. It may be
something you mainly engage in during your leisure
time, or perhaps it has evolved into a career or route
into study.
For instance, many of us are passionate about music,
reading books, watching films, or playing a sport.
Having the time and freedom to pursue these interests
is often closely tied to our wellbeing, and helps us to
form a positive self-identity, shaping who we are.


                                                         7
    At least, this tends to be the case if you are considered
    to be neurotypical. Historically, however, for those of us
    who are autistic, or otherwise neurodivergent, such
    interests are talked about using negative, medicalized
    terminology which describes them as ‘special’ interests
    and as ‘repetitive and restrictive’.
    To push back against these pathologising takes, the
    Ruling Passions project takes a more positive approach.
    Reframing these interests as ‘ruling passions’, the
    project has worked with the understanding that these
    interests can take on additional significance for
    neurodivergent people due to the depth of involvement
    or amount of time and thought invested into a
    particular topic or activity.
    The project was led by an autistic researcher and
    sought to expand our understanding of what are often
    called ‘special interests’ – showing them as more
    meaningful and          complex      than ‘medicalised’
    understandings may suggest.

8
The project also had a particular focus on literacy
(reading and writing) and used an understanding of
literacy (from New Literacy Studies) that sees the
creation and consumption of texts as involving more
than (just) words. Related ideas around multimodality
help us to think about how we make meaning and
communicate using more than written or spoken
language – we use ‘modes’ such as gesture, expression,
images, sound, movement, colour etc.

The term ‘ruling passions’ has been borrowed from
literacy researchers David Barton and Mary Hamilton
who used it in 1998 in their work around ‘Local
Literacies’. I am interested in extending the use of the
term here to apply to the interests of autistic (and
other neurodivergent) people.



                                                       9
  About the term ‘Special Interest’

   The first mention of ‘special interests’ was made in a
   document published in October 1954 by Medical Doctors
   J. Franklin Robinson and Louis J. Vitale, called ‘Children
   with Circumscribed Interest Patterns’. They wrote about
   children who ‘develop special interests and sometime
   special abilities’. The three children they described were
   said to show a ‘withholding of interest or endeavour in
   other types of activity or areas of thought’ with ‘a
   restriction of social interest and limited establishment of
   interpersonal relationships’. Throughout the text, the
   focused interests are written about as undesirable
   problems for the children and their families.
   The document currently most widely used in autism
   diagnosis is the DSM-5. This talks about such interests as
   ‘restrictive and repetitive’. Such negative framings
   demonstrate how the term ‘special interests’ has its
   origins in medicalised understanding of autism - what Nick
10
   Walker calls the pathology paradigm.
Much academic literature has followed suit, repeatedly
framing these interests in reductive and stigmatising
ways. There are exceptions, however. Andy McDonnell
and Damian Milton have written about autistic people’s
interests in relation to ‘a flow state... where a person is
so immersed in an activity that nothing else seems to
matter’. Rebecca Wood has written about the value of
incorporating intense interests into educational
contexts.
This project aims to add to the literature around these
interests by reconsidering them as ‘ruling passions’, and
building on work around what Nick Walker describes as
the neurodiversity paradigm.
Note: many autistic people – including participants in
this project – are happy to use the term special
interests. Language changes over time and, for this
reason, I am not suggesting that the term necessarily
needs replacing. However, by highlighting the
medicalised origins and using alternative descriptions –
such as ‘ruling passions’ – I am hoping that we can
consciously move further away from these negative
framings towards a more complex understanding of
what have historically been called ‘special interests’.
                                                         11
     The Project

     The Ruling Passions Project included 13 autistic adults as
     participants, each of whom was invited to share their
     perspectives on their own interests. They were provided
     with a variety of communication options tailored to their
     individual needs and preferences. These options included
     face-to-face interviews, online video calls, telephone
     conversations, and text-based methods like email
     exchanges or social media interactions.
     All participants responded to a common set of questions
     related to their life experiences and the significance of
     their interests. They discussed how their interests had
     developed during their earlier years, their experiences in
     school, and the roles these interests currently play in their
     lives. They were also asked about the ways in which their
     interests may have related to literacy.

12
   This wordcloud collects together the variety of
interests named by everyone involved in the project.
 Larger words indicate that they were mentioned by
                multiple participants.
                                                       13
     The participants: in their own
     words
     On the following pages, you will find insights from the project's
     participants as they discuss their individual interests and the
     roles these play in their lives.
     These excerpts are condensed from more extensive transcripts,
     chosen to provide a glimpse into the subjects each person
     covered. I hope they begin to give some idea of the depth and
     variety of interests covered by the participants.
     Participants did not have to have a medical autism diagnosis –
     but in the event 12 / 13 of the participants did have a formal
     diagnosis. One participant considered themselves to be
     neurodivergent – via several other medical diagnoses - and
     strongly associated their experiences with the concept of
     ‘special interest’.
     Participants used a range of terms to describe their ruling
     passions – this included ‘special interests’ (also shortened to
     SPIN), specialised interests, focussed interests, obsessions,
     fascinations etc
     Participant names are pseudonyms.

14
I did not provide participants with a definition of ‘special
interests’, but they were asked to consider what the term
meant for them. Here are a few of their responses...
Ian suggested that autistic people’s interests are
characterised by their ‘breadth and depth’.
For Avery they are ‘an area of intense focus’.
MEJ described how autistic people ‘like to pull at threads
and pull at them until we get to the end. And sometimes
that can take us on a journey into a direction where we
suddenly learn a lot about a subject that perhaps other
people may not understand why would want to know that
much about it, but for us it brings a sense of satisfaction’.
Graham saw a ‘special interest’ as one that would ‘serve
more purposes and to be more significant than the hobby or
the pastime of the non-autistic person’.
P understood them as an interests that ‘really sort of
transport you’.
They were framed by Ben as an interest that ‘has a special
place in [the autistic person’s] life and in their heart that
they derive a lot of joy out of, they derive quite often some
peace from it as well.’

                                                           15
        Laura in her own words
     “So the first one, and I think this is quite a common one:
     dinosaurs! And that's still something that members of my family
     will just always bring up about me, like memories of just having
     loads of facts about dinosaurs and collecting toys, correcting the
     teachers about dinosaur facts! So that's probably my earliest one,
     or one of the earliest ones. There was a video, a David
     Attenborough video about moles that I... had a special interest for
     quite a long period of time...

     If I get a free moment, it will be spent looking at different trainers,
     different trainer designs, bookmarking trainers that I would like but
     I'm actually not going to buy, or just trainers that I just find
     interesting.. I've got a few pairs but I'm not someone who - the
     term hype boost where people will go out on the first day and get
     the box and I don't keep them in the boxes... It's more about - I
     think it's almost like a dream, like one day I'll have those trainers. It
     just makes me happy just looking at a nice, designed pair of
     trainers.”

16
    ... If I get a free moment, it will
      be spent looking at different
                                          Laura (she/her)
         trainers, different trainer                 age 33
     designs, bookmarking trainers
          that I would like but I'm
        actually not going to buy...




[Image by Susana Salas / Blush]                               17
     Kate in her own words

“When I was a child, my mum has said that I used to want to play the
same board game over and over again and I used to love reading
those 'big book of questions and answers' books, especially the
science sections... as a teenager I loved biology (I wanted to be a vet
and would memorise anatomy diagrams!) and then went on to study
biomedical science at university. I think I have a brain that just really
easily visualises structures in the body and remembers facts,
regardless of whether they are useful or not!

Knitting is a dual purpose thing, I guess. I'm really interested in the
history of knitting and traditional styles of knitting so things like fair
isle hats and Shetland lace... and learning those really old techniques
... also knitting is an almost socially acceptable stim, so I can do it on
public transport or if I'm in a pub with friends and keeping my hands
busy helps me to cope with waiting for things as I feel like I'm being
productive... I think it's also a visual stim as I like looking at patterns
and yarn online and find this really relaxing which I think is partly to
do with liking bright colours and rainbows!”
18
     ... Knitting is an almost socially
    acceptable stim, so I can do it on
   public transport or if I'm in a pub
                                          Kate (she/her)
                                                   age 40
       with friends and keeping my
   hands busy helps me to cope with
            waiting for things...




[Image from unDraw]
                                                            19
      MEJ in his own words

“... It’s about the detail. It’s about creating and having power over
those details. I was into painting toy soldiers, but I always painted
really small ones. It was about the detail. I’ve always been detail
focused. It was about the buttons on the uniform. It’s about the
watches people wear. It’s about what jewellery they’ve got on....
  … Some of my interests in childhood were perhaps to do with
escapism due to a highly transitional childhood… I’ve always been
into bikes one way or another and wheeled objects that have given
me a sense of peace, mountain bikes, then skateboards, then BMXs,
then back to mountain bikes because it gives me a sense of control
and a sense of rhythm I think with the pedalling and also the
natural flow of the environment…
… Fluidity I think is a key word there. That’s sort of been my safe
place, a situation of cohesive fluidity where I am in control of the
fluidity, but it is fluid. As a physically awkward person who’s fallen
over his own feet for years, to be in a situation where suddenly
everything just rolls naturally is important…”


20
                                                MEJ (he/him)
                                                        age 42
... It gives me a sense
    of control and a
   sense of rhythm...




                          [Image from unDraw]
                                                             21
     Robert in his own words
“... it's the breadth and depth of how much you engage in that
interest that turns it from an interest... to a passionate interest in
my view. So say for example one of mine is reading, always has
been, from the minute I could read that was it, I would stay up with
a torch under my covers and I would set my alarm for half past five
so I could start reading earlier on in the day and I would read a book
and then I would read the next book in the series and the next book
and then I'd go back and start again. To this day I will read books
literally hundreds of times, the same book over and over again…
… If you've got a passion you always know what to do, you always
know what to think about, you've got something so motivating to
engage you, by definition you can never get bored. It's amazing….
… I'm quite sporty. I'm not in the slightest bit interested in winning
anything. I've played rugby.… My team were lovely… Squash was
another one. I used to get absolutely fixated on squash and
practicing in my head the same shot over and over again or
whatever it might be…
… I don't see how you can have an interest without it being
passionate… I think it is pretty much all or nothing…”
22
Robert (he/him)                       … If you've got a passion you
           age 51                      always know what to do,
                                       you always know what to
                                              think about...




                [Image from unDraw]
                                                                      23
 Ashley in their own words
“I think reading really as a child was probably my main interest. I was
a stereotypical bookworm and I would get six library books out in a
week and read them all and now as a tired 42 year old I could never
manage to read that many in a week! Life changes you like that.
... And then as a teenager I think it moved more into music, so I was a
huge fan of The Cure and I collected all of their albums, often through
borrowing the CD from the library and recording it on to tape! Then in
my 20s it was often a series of hobbies really. So I went to life drawing
classes for quite a while and dabbled with that and then there was the
knitting which I did learn to knit as a child but didn't quite get the hang
of it and then early 2000s I taught myself to do it properly and, yeah,
that became just a really nice way to relax. Browsing patterns and
things I want to make. There's a big crossover between knitting and
general nerd things and geek things so, you know, you've always got
your Star Trek knitting...”

24
      ... I think reading really as a
      child was probably my main
     interest. I was a stereotypical
                                        Ashley
                                         (they/them)
      bookworm and I would get
                                               age 42
        six library books out in a
        week and read them all...




[Image by Susana Salas / Blush]
                                                        25
Graham in his own words

“... by the time I went to university I’d probably read about half of
the books in [small town] Library because they didn’t have that
many...
... They had about 150 science-fiction books and so once I’d read all
of those I had to branch out a bit...
... I remember getting a very strange book about musique concrète
but it was basically about how to do it yourself, you know, for the
interested schoolboy, like can you borrow a tape recorder? If you
can then the world is your oyster...
... Record an alarm clock, then you can slow it down like this and
maybe try and put it with, you know, get a dog to bark and then try
playing that backwards. Yeah, so I was doing all that and I suppose I
started trying to do some of that with my bass guitar. Some of that
was on my own and then some of it was then playing in bands...
... I suppose you could start it at about age 13 or something, 13, 14
and seeing The Stranglers on Top of the Pops and thinking this is
fantastic! That incredibly growling sound made by that very
handsome guy at the back, you know, I would like to me that man. I
wanted to be Jean-Jacques Burnel and I still do I think if that was an
option!”
26
Graham                    ... I suppose you could start it
(he/him)
age 56                    at about age 13 or something,
                                13, 14 and seeing The
                          Stranglers on Top of the Pops
                          and thinking this is fantastic! I
                            wanted to be Jean-Jacques
                                       Burnel...




           [Image from unDraw]                            27
      Ben in his own words

“I’ve got two main special interests at the moment, which are
lifeboats and Dungeons & Dragons…
… with the lifeboats I really enjoy just how they look, the bright
orange, the smoothness of them, but I also especially love the
different classifications of them, the types…
… if I’m feeling particularly stressed or anxious or if I’m feeling
particularly down, then visiting a lifeboat station and seeing the
boat does help calm me down, and help cheer me up because, I
can focus on it, I can put all my brain power into just admiring it,
admiring the colour, what class of lifeboat it is… mum, my
brother and me.… they’re happy to go around and rush around
the country to find them!
… in terms of Dungeons & Dragons, [this] has impacted [me]
socially and has been really good because it’s meant I can make
friends that have similar interests to me… and [I] talk to them
about that…”

28
Ben (he/him)
age 20
                              ... if I’m feeling particularly
                        stressed or anxious or if I’m feeling
                         particularly down, then visiting a
                           lifeboat station and seeing the
                          boat does help calm me down...




               [Image from unDraw]                              29
       Ian in his own words

“I've played guitar all my life, well, since I was about 14 or so.
Never been any good but I've always owned a guitar and I've got
one in the lounge now... so I discovered Debussy and Chopin and
thought, wow, this stuff is amazing and I like a spectrum of classical
music now. Not all of it, you know, the likes of Shostakovich and the
big ponderous Russians are a bit much for me and I definitely don't
like the marching music, or dance music...
... I found things to fill my life and they have given me great
pleasure. In another universe it might be that if I could have been
more socially acceptable then possibly I might not have developed
these interests or they might not have been as deep or whatever, I
don't know that. You know, 'what if's' are fun to think about but you
can't actually come to any conclusions because it's quite
impossible...
... the only hero I had was the Lone Ranger... have you seen the
Johnny Depp film of the Lone Ranger? ...right at the end when he
gallops in on Silver and they start playing the William Tell Overture,
god. I was four again. Tears came to my eyes.”


30
                      Ian (he/him)
                                 age 66
 ...the only hero I
had was the Lone
      Ranger...




                          [Image from unDraw]
                                           31
        P in their own words

“I've never been someone that's had one special interest, I've always
maintained about six or seven so I was sort of really interested at
various points in LGBT history and scepticism and philosophy and that
kind of thing.
... I never thought to myself that I hear music in a different way to
other people and then it transpired that I did so hearing it in a more
analytical way than other people… hearing all the individual parts,
being able with my general sound landscape to strip everything down
and work out, you know, these layers and landscapes of sound… I
didn't learn that not everyone had such a strong emotional reaction to
harmony. I would watch people listening to music and think how are
you not literally exploding right now? I don't understand how….
... Yeah, so that can be quite difficult, not understanding why other
people aren't as interested because it can come across in a very
intense way and not everyone wants to engage in that all the time and
that's fair… I've sort of built my life around various obsessions…”



32
P (they/them)
age 25
                 ... I never thought to myself that I
                   hear music in a different way to
                other people and then it transpired
                  that I did so hearing it in a more
                analytical way than other people…




                                   [Image from unDraw]

                                                         33
 Catharine in her own words

“So my all-encompassing obsession which has been probably since
I was a teenager is vintage and old stuff but not - when I tell people
I like vintage things they get it totally wrong and think I mean 1940s
florals but really it's like mid-century, 60s, 70s, some 80s, even 90s is
vintage now which is really scary.
... My house looks very 70s! Yeah. I'm selling a bit of vintage myself
now. I've got a little unit in an antiques centre. I've sold on eBay
since the early 2000s...
...I've always been interested in reading. When I was young I used to
love reading about animals and I suppose animals were a special
interest for me as a child, cats and dogs particularly, wildlife.... I had
lots of soft toys; I was obsessed with animals but as I've got older - I
went through a period of never reading any fiction. I though I don't
like fiction, it's boring, what's the point in reading about fiction
when you should be reading about fact and, you know, things that
have actually happened but then suddenly in probably the last four
years I've actually managed to sit down and read some fiction and
enjoy it for what it is. So I've always loved reading. I do always tend
to go for either things to do with nature and the world or things
that are a bit darker...”
34
 ... my all-encompassing obsession       Catharine (she/her)
 which has been probably since I                        age 38
 was a teenager is vintage and old
 stuff... I'm selling a bit of vintage
 myself now.... I've sold on eBay
 since the early 2000s...




[Image from unDraw]


                                                                 35
     Avery in their own words

“One of my current spins is figuring out the language to express my
thoughts on my experience of autism and gender. Both of these are
minority experiences compared to the general population. Language is
evolved to meet the needs of the people who speak it, so it's natural
that we have words and phrases to express neurotypical cisgendered
ideas clearly. But when it comes to expressing the thoughts and
feelings and experiences of GSRM or autistic individuals, the language
is lacking. How does it feel to have a gender that isn't within the
binary? How does it feel to have an autistic meltdown?

... One of my early childhood spins was computers. I was fascinated by
the small computer that my parents bought to do word processing
back in the 80s. I opened up the cover to see all the components, and
explored the interface to see all of the functions it was capable of. My
mother bought me my first textbook on computer programming when
I was 7, and it's been a lifelong spin since then that I've leveraged into
a career.”

36
Avery (they/them)
             age 39
                        ... One of my early childhood
                         spins was computers. I was
                      fascinated by the small computer
                        that my parents bought to do
                         word processing back in the
                                    80s...




                                            [Image from unDraw]

                                                                  37
Emma in their own words

“Fish, I had a massive obsession with for years and I was
obsessed with tabletop wargames and RPGs for a lot of my
teenage years...
... Special interests to me are when a particular series of
thoughts are clearer than others - it is comforting to think of
my special interests cause thinking about them and
understanding how I’m thinking is simple when I enjoy the
subject. I generally refer to them as my obsessions just cause
that’s how they get. They are my way of thinking and can
become exclusively what I think about.
... Monster Hunter is a franchise I’m obsessed with over the
past two years and when I’m playing it it drowns all else out
and allows me to think over ideas and equipment even after
being done for the day so I can have clear thoughts... I love
video games in general as well... getting lost in a fantasy or
another world...”
38
Emma (they/them)
              age 18

                                             ... I love video games in
                                             general as well... getting
                                                 lost in a fantasy or
                                                   another world...




          [Image by Leni Kauffman / Blush]
                                                                          39
 Solange in her own words

“I have always struggled to fit in and called myself weirdo and just
loved being by myself most of the time, even though I was born and
raised in Africa with a very different cultural setting. I have never
liked noise and loud music… I now have a name for my being different
and celebrate and advocate for this identity within the Black and
Minority Ethnic communities both here in the UK and in some parts of
Africa. I went to a mainstream school back in Africa but struggled with
socialising and keeping friends. My mum thought it was wrong for me
not to make and keep my friends.
... Specialist interests have helped me a lot in terms of my professional
development. It gives me sanity as I have specialized in the industry I
work. I like talking about autism and bringing awareness to the
condition within our community. My other obsession is God and
everything liberally Godly. I liked singing in the past; I still do love
singing. I also like taking pictures of nature. My Godliness gives me
sanity and something to concentrate on and be myself without a care
in the world...”

40
        Solange
        (she/her)
        age 50

                                   I liked singing in the
                                     past; I still do love
                                 singing. I also like taking
                                    pictures of nature.




[Image by Sara Pelaez / Blush]                                 41
          Themes and Findings
Here I address four themes drawn directly from
participants accounts of their engagement with their
interests.


                  Identity                             meaning
                                                       making /
                                                      perception
     Wellbeing                     Neurodivergent
                                   Literacies



                 Some of these findings form the basis of an
                 academic paper: Neurodivergent literacies’:
                 exploring autistic adults' ‘ruling passions’ and
                 embracing neurodiversity through classroom
                 literacies
42
 Wellbeing

Several participants described how spending time with their ruling
passions is a key component to ensure their positive wellbeing.
For Avery, for instance, their ruling passions are ‘a necessary part of
being healthy’, offering ‘an opportunity to flex my mental and
physical muscles, to escape from the pressures of allistic society, to
engage in a mode of thinking that is highly compatible with my
neurotype’. Similarly, Emma described how they liked ‘getting lost in
a fantasy or another world’ through video games which enabled
them to have ‘clear thoughts.’
In many cases, ruling passions also had a sensory component which
the participants talked about positively in terms of ‘stimming’ - the
process self-regulation achieved through sensory means. For some
this came through music, for others via knitting or bike riding. P
talked about the ‘stimmy side’ of music, suggesting that ‘the
unintentional movement of music is really important to me and is
just a regulating kind of mechanism.’
Like autistic people’s interests, stimming has also been framed
negatively by medicalising literature. However, the crossover
between sensory regulation and ruling passions here was one of the
factors that made these interests so vital for positive wellbeing. 43
Many participants talked about prior experiences of
challenge in relation to their mental health, particularly in
the context of the social aspects of school. When reflecting
on earlier life, positive experiences at school tended to be
related to chances to pursue personal interests. Kate
remembered that she ‘just loved learning … school allowed
me to pursue subjects like History, Science’.
The most positive accounts of educational experience came
from Avery, who was home-schooled: ‘My mother met me
where I was … she was able to adapt lessons to my way of
thinking … That included special interests. She'd often give
me the opportunity to write essays on some of my spins,
which was a stroke of genius on her part.’
Others recalled occasions when teachers acknowledged their
interests in classroom contexts. ‘P’ ‘had a couple of really
good teachers who noticed my interest in things’. Laura
remembered a drama teacher who would ‘bring in familiar
reference points to help me with whatever it was we were
learning’.
However, Ben, a recent school-leaver, reflected: ‘If I was
allowed in the social context to express my interest … and
really share it, then I would have absolutely loved that. I
don't think I did it for school’. This suggests several missed
opportunities for drawing on interests in educational
contexts.

44
 Identity

For many participants, ruling passions were entangled with aspects of their
identities.
As ‘P’ articulated, ‘the autistic identity comes with special interest for me …
because I've sort of built my life around various obsessions’. Some
participants had a focused interest in autism as a subject and described
engaging with this interest through reading and writing. As a result of this
focus, and their own lived experience, several had jobs where they
supported other autistic people or taught about autism. Solange talked
about reading ‘all the latest research in Autism’, explaining that she has
published work with others’ about autism in the BME community’, while Ian
blogged about his experience of being autistic.
Robert described autism as one of his ‘biggest interests' since the age of 14.
Working most of his life in jobs around autism involved ‘reading about
autism, thinking about autism, engaging with autistic people, watching
YouTube, you know, just everything’. As well as using writing to
challenge ‘the nonsense that most people think about autism’, he talked
eagerly about setting up new platforms to promote visibility of autistic
perspectives. For Ashley, diagnosed later in life, realising that they were
autistic involved ‘finding an identity and reaching some self-acceptance’. This
led them to ‘reading articles in newspapers and magazines … listening to
podcasts' to learn more, eventually re-entering academia to study autism.

                                                                             45
For some individuals, their experiences of gender and sexuality
were intertwined with their experiences of being autistic. ‘P’, for
example, had a strong appetite for reading about LGBTQIA+
history. Avery identified 'linguistic evolution in minority spaces' as
one of their ruling passions, which involved 'developing the
language to articulate my thoughts on my experiences of autism
and gender.' They recognized that 'both of these are minority
experiences compared to the general population' and, as a result,
'the language is lacking.' Avery described how 'participating in
discussions in online forums ... repeating those same interactions
over and over, I get to try out different ways to express my
thoughts on the topic of gender, how I experience it, how I relate
to a society that doesn't really "get it“...’.

For some, the ruling passion itself served as a marker of their
identity. Several participants explained how they established
meaningful connections with others due to their specific interests.
This, in turn, facilitated their integration into a community of like-
minded individuals who shared the same topics or focus. In
essence, their passion became a means of forging friendships and
relationships with others who harboured similar enthusiasms and
motivations, ultimately becoming an expression of collective
identity.

46
 Neurodivergent Literacies

A key aspect of the project involved investigating ruling passions in
connection with literacies, and this exploration unveiled a variety of
literacy related ruling passions, with a notable emphasis on reading.
Several participants expressed a passion for the act of reading itself,
regardless of the subject matter. They described their deep love for
reading and how it consumed a significant portion of their time. Ashley
reflected that ‘reading really, as a child, was probably my main interest.
I was a stereotypical bookworm and I would get six library books out in
a week and read them all’. As a child, Catharine would ‘just take myself
away with my books and sit and read for ages’. Some participants also
explained how they had exhibited untypically early reading skills.
Participants mentioned their enjoyment of both non-fiction and
fiction, a fact that challenges claims that autistic individuals tend to
gravitate toward non-fiction and may struggle with understanding
characters (as suggested in the Autistic Quotient test, for
instance). Graham recalled that ‘by the time I went to university I'd
probably read about half of the books in [small town] Library because
they didn't have that many … They had about 150 science-fiction books
and so once I'd read all of those I had to branch out a bit’. For several
participants, reading did involve a profound engagement with stories
and characters.

                                                                        47
Kate recalled ‘reading novels in lessons because I was bored … and I
would take myself off at break times to read’. Ben described his
passion for narrative and story via the ‘tabletop role-playing game’
‘Dungeons and Dragons’. He explained ‘I really enjoy it because I
enjoy the narrative, the telling the story both as a player and then
also running games myself … I am regularly either thinking about a
new character concept, thinking about where I want to take the
campaign       story    …’.      He    talked     about      assigning
characters ‘personality’ and ‘motive’, linking with his earlier love of
Lego, which often involved ‘imagining, in my head, the
story’ associated with his play.
Many participants referred to literacies linked to their other
interests. This often involved a desire to know as much as possible
about a topic. Catharine and Kate talked about reading books about
their interests ‘from cover to cover’. MEJ remembered ‘when I
started learning the guitar, I read all the books, not just about how
to play guitars, but who made guitars, where they were made, what
the types of materials were …’. Talking about her love of the band
Manic Street Preachers, Catharine recalled ‘collect[ing] as many
magazines like NME and Melody Maker … to learn more and gain
details from interviews …’. Kate's interest in cooking meant she
‘read cookbooks for enjoyment’. Robert shared this love of
cookbooks – he would ‘read a cookbook beginning to end’ but had
never followed a recipe!

48
 Meaning making / perception

Several participants demonstrated how their ruling
passions were directly related to their sense making
processes. It was through their interests that they
understood the world, as their interests contributed strongly
to their understanding of the wider world, often beyond the
interest itself.
For instance, Laura described how she would ‘always relate
things to certain films’. Similarly, ‘P’ recalled ‘very early on,
before I developed the tools of observation and analysis … I
was using people in literature … so I was thinking, oh this
person is like this book that I've read, so I was sort of parsing
meaning in terms of these fictional worlds that I was
experiencing’. For MEJ, reading stories was how he ‘learnt to
recognise different registers early on and the details in
people's speech’. He cited this as a foundation for
understanding social relationships, enabling him to ‘work
with people’.
                                                                49
The process of 'thinking with' their ruling passions doesn't
just pertain to stories but extends to other types of
interests. Ruling passions were sometimes regarded as a
lens through which to experience the world. For example,
Ben discussed his significant preoccupation with symmetry,
explaining how it influenced his worldview. He described
how his initial fascination with symmetrical objects and
landscapes evolved as he "made a conscious decision to
shift my focus towards asymmetry, developing an
appreciation for it, and using it to balance my perspective."
MEJ identified 'detail' as a ruling passion, and this emphasis
on detail was how he processed his experience of the world.
Robert meanwhile observed how his experiences were often
shaped by patterns – particularly those involving patterns of
three.
Some of these ideas may diverge considerably from the
conventional understanding of autistic people's interests,
typically framed as 'special interests.' However, since these
ideas have emerged from autistic individuals' own self-
perceptions and understanding of their interests, it seems
appropriate to give them further attention.

50
Summary
I suggest that we need to revisit the concept of 'special interests' and embrace a
more expansive understanding of what such interests represent in the lives of
autistic people. The data presented by participants as part of this project
suggests that:


• Engaging with Ruling Passions is strongly associated with positive well-being.
• Ruling Passions are intertwined with various literacies, particularly
  encompassing a range of reading genres that challenge commonly held
  stereotypes about autistic people.
• Ruling passions play a role in shaping positive identity formation in multiple
  ways.
• Ruling passions assist autistic individuals in deriving meaning from, within,
  and about the world.


Instead of viewing interests as limited or confining, it would be beneficial to
approach them in terms of their depth and diversity. This shift in perspective can
help to move away from potentially harmful and constrictive stereotypes
surrounding autistic identity and experience. By transitioning towards an
understanding of the value of these interests - co-constructed with the
community, rather than stemming from medicalisation - we can reduce stigma
and potentially enhance the wellbeing of autistic children and adults.
Of course, much of this will not be ‘new knowledge’ to autistic people
themselves. However, the more we can share this kind of ‘community knowledge’
the more likely we are to change perceptions for the better.
                                                                                51
      Ruling Passions Gallery
     Several autistic adults have contributed visual material
     for about their interests. These have been compiled in
     an online gallery.




            The gallery features drawings and photographs in
           relation to ruling passions, alongside the words of
                                 those who contributed them.
52
You can access the gallery online in 2D or 3D by
following the link or using the QR code.




                     https://rulingpassions.wordpress
                         .com/ruling-passions-gallery/
                                                   53
     Gallery Extract 1: Pip Brown




                  ‘self portraits / study of facial expressions’




 “One of my special interests is portraiture… My process sort
 of illustrates the local versus global bias that is common to
 lots of autistic sensory processing (moving from pockets of
 detail to pockets of detail etc…). “



54
 Gallery Extract 2: Catharine




                     ‘photographs of vintage items’




“So my all-encompassing obsession which has been probably
since I was a teenager is vintage and old stuff but not – when
I tell people I like vintage things they get it totally wrong and
think I mean 1940s florals but really it’s like mid-century, 60s,
70s, some 80s, even 90s is vintage now which is really
scary…. Anything over 20 years old.”


                                                               55
Ruling Passions Podcast
There is a podcast linked to this project, called the Ruling
Passions Podcast.
Each episode includes an interview with an autistic person
discussing their own ruling passion – as well as explaining
a little about their own individual context. You can find the
podcast on most podcast hosting platforms by searching
for ‘ruling passions’. It is also available here:
https://rulingpassions.wordpress.com/podcast-subscribe




56
Podcast Episode Guide

Episode 1 - Pip Brown on portraiture, music, sensory
experience,      alexithymia,      embodiment,    LGBTQ+       heroes,
visualisation, parallel play, flow and burnout
Episode 2 - Jason Arday talks about race, autistic
masking, vulnerability, intrinsic / extrinsic motivation, expectations
of academia and the importance of music
Episode 3 - Katie Twomey on language, Chernobyl,
pattern, alternative futures, aphantasia, synaesthesia, maths,
reading, collecting conkers, masking, gendered conditioning and…
being a magical unicorn
Episode 4 – Billie Jo Gibson talks about an autistic
childhood, gender identity, childhood special interests, politics,
class, trauma and mental health assessment, Grand Theft Auto and
Liverpool / Scouse Culture
Episode 5 – Nick Walker on aikido, world building,
story and character creation, collaboration, comics, autism and
trans experience
Episode 6 – Becky Stothard talks about patterns of
behaviour, detail, anatomy, science, history, recipes and knitting

                                                                     57
Next Steps – beyond this
project
I am now seeking funding to extend this work to explore
the ideas further in a special school setting with
neurodivergent children, using arts-based methods. This
will involve other researchers who are interested in
childhood and neurodiversity.
I hope to pursue the idea of ‘ruling passions’ in relation to
neurodivergence more widely (e.g. not just using it as a
term that replaces ‘autistic special interests’ but exploring
the ruling passions of other neurodivergent populations).
I am developing the use of the concept of ‘neurodivergent
literacies’ to look at the experiences of neurodivergent
people more widely in relation to reading and writing (e.g.
starting with a project exploring the experiences of ADHD
students).
I will continue to share this work with different audiences
– academic and non-academic. You can find out about
future work on the Ruling Passions Wordpress site. Please
share this work with anyone you think would be
interested.

58
Glossary
  • Neurodiversity – the understanding that populations are naturally
    neurologically diverse e.g. that people’s minds differ in multiple ways.
    (Because our minds are located in our bodies, it is also useful to think
    of this relating to ‘bodyminds’ rather than just ‘brains’)
  • Neurodivergent – a term used for people whose neurology differs
    from what society expects or considers ‘typical’. This includes people
    who are autistic, ADHD, dyslexic etc and is a broad and inclusive
    term. This was originally coined by Kassiane Asaumasu
  • Neurotypical – the term used for people – or sections of society -
    who are not considered to be neurodivergent
  • Ruling Passion – a reframing of the idea of ‘special interests’,
    borrowed from the work of Barton and Hamilton around literacy and
    used in this project to look more positively on people’s experiences
    around ‘special interests’
  • Special interest – a term often used to describe autistic people’s
    interests, but which has its origins in medical literature
  • Neurodivergent Literacies – a term arising from this project to
    describe the the literacies (reading and writing etc) engaged in by
    neurodivergent people, and an encouragement that we should focus
    more on these practices as they are often misunderstood or lack
    prior research

  Note: I recommend Dr. Nick Walker’s webpage on terms and definitions
  for a more expansive description of words relating to autism and
  neurodiversity – particularly the ‘neurodiversity paradigm’:
  https://neuroqueer.com/neurodiversity-terms-and-definitions/


                                                                               59
     References
     A short list of academic work referred to in this handbook...

     Bailey – ‘Neurodivergent Literacies’: https://doi.org/10.1111/lit.12320
     Barton and Hamilton - ‘Local Literacies’:
     https://www.routledge.com/Local-Literacies-Reading-and-Writing-in-
     One-Community/Barton-Hamilton/p/book/9780415691741
     McDonnell and Milton - ‘Going with the flow: Reconsidering ‘repetitive
     behaviour’ through the concept of ‘flow states’’:
     https://kar.kent.ac.uk/62647/
     Robinson and Vitale - ‘Children with Circumscribed interest patterns’
     https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1939-0025.1954.tb06145.x
     Walker- ‘Neuroqueer Heresies’: https://neuroqueer.com/neuroqueer-
     heresies/
     Wood – ‘Autism, intense interests and support in school: from wasted
     efforts to shared understandings’:
     https://doi.org/10.1080/00131911.2019.1566213

     I also wrote a little about my own ruling passions in a recent book
     chapter – the preprint is available to read here for free:
     https://drchrisjbailey.wordpress.com/2022/03/08/preprint-chapter-
     connected-to-the-soul-autoethnography-neurodiversity-and-literacies-
     in-times-of-ongoing-change/




60
About the researcher

Dr. Chris Bailey is an autistic
academic working in the Education
Department at Sheffield Hallam
University
Their current (and fairly long
running) ruling passions are film
photography, running and music



You can contact Chris at:


                 c.bailey@shu.ac.uk




                                      61
     Acknowledgements

     Thank you to all project participants who shared their ideas so
     generously and made this work possible.
     The project was funded using a grant from the UK Literacy Association
     (UKLA): https://ukla.org/research/ukla-research-grants/
     Photos used on the front cover and elsewhere were provided by
     participants and / or those who submitted to the gallery:

     Portrait by Pip Brown
     Owl Tapestry photo by Catharine
     London Eye photo by Solange
     Socks by Kate
     Sonic drawing photo by Laura
     Camera photo and author photo both by the author

     All illustrations sourced from unDraw and Blush (attributions given to
     individual artists and all images used within usage guidance). The
     images used are for the purpose of illustration but should not be taken
     as direct or intentional visual representations of any participants.

     Thank you to Catherine Wynn for event organisation.


62
www.rulingpassions.wordpress.com
The Ruling Passions Handbook is an overview of the
Ruling Passions Project, produced for a public
audience as part of the Festival of Social Sciences in
2023.
It is one output from the Ruling Passions Project.
This project involved 13 autistic adults reflecting on
the meanings they made around what are often
called their ‘special interests’.
This book was made for anyone interested in
finding out more about this project, and this topic
in general.
