Edinburgh Research Explorer

Peer mentoring in higher education: issues of power and control


Citation for published version:
Christie, H 2014, 'Peer mentoring in higher education: issues of power and control', Teaching in Higher
Education, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 955.




Link:
Link to publication record in Edinburgh Research Explorer


Document Version:
Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record



Published In:
Teaching in Higher Education


Publisher Rights Statement:
© Peer mentoring in higher education: issues of power and control. / Christie, Hazel.
In: Teaching in Higher Education, Vol. 19, No. 3, 01.11.2014, p. 955.




General rights
Copyright for the publications made accessible via the Edinburgh Research Explorer is retained by the author(s)
and / or other copyright owners and it is a condition of accessing these publications that users recognise and
abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.


Take down policy
The University of Edinburgh has made every reasonable effort to ensure that Edinburgh Research Explorer
content complies with UK legislation. If you believe that the public display of this file breaches copyright please
contact openaccess@ed.ac.uk providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately and
investigate your claim.




Download date: 07. Aug. 2026
This article was downloaded by: [The University of Edinburgh]
On: 31 March 2015, At: 02:16
Publisher: Routledge
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered
office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK



                                 Teaching in Higher Education
                                 Publication details, including instructions for authors and
                                 subscription information:
                                 http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/cthe20

                                 Peer mentoring in higher education:
                                 issues of power and control
                                                  a
                                 Hazel Christie
                                 a
                                  Institute for Academic Development, University of Edinburgh, 7
                                 Bristo Square, Edinburgh EH8 9AL, UK
                                 Published online: 16 Jul 2014.




Click for updates


To cite this article: Hazel Christie (2014) Peer mentoring in higher education: issues of power and
control, Teaching in Higher Education, 19:8, 955-965, DOI: 10.1080/13562517.2014.934355

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13562517.2014.934355



PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the
“Content”) contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis,
our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to
the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors,
and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content
should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources
of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims,
proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or
howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising
out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any
substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,
systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &
                                                                     Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-
                                                                     and-conditions




Downloaded by [The University of Edinburgh] at 02:16 31 March 2015
                                                                     Teaching in Higher Education, 2014
                                                                     Vol. 19, No. 8, 955–965, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13562517.2014.934355




                                                                     Peer mentoring in higher education: issues of power and control
                                                                     Hazel Christie*

                                                                     Institute for Academic Development, University of Edinburgh, 7 Bristo Square,
                                                                     Edinburgh EH8 9AL, UK
                                                                     (Received 8 January 2014; accepted 10 June 2014)




Downloaded by [The University of Edinburgh] at 02:16 31 March 2015
                                                                            In response to widespread support for mentoring schemes in higher education this
                                                                            article calls for a more critical investigation of the dynamics of power and control,
                                                                            which are intrinsic to the mentoring process, and questions presumptions that
                                                                            mentoring brings only positive benefits to its participants. It provides this more
                                                                            critical appraisal by using evidence from a mentoring project at one university in the
                                                                            UK. Attention is drawn to three keys issues: first, to the highly formalised nature of
                                                                            the mentoring project; second, to the extent to which the project socialises mentees to
                                                                            ‘fit in’ to university life; and third, to tensions in the mentoring relationship which
                                                                            centre on academic skills development. Together these issues allow the beginning of a
                                                                            more critical interpretation of how mentoring operates as a form of institutional
                                                                            control, as well as opening up, for scrutiny, some of mentoring’s often taken-for-
                                                                            granted positive effects.
                                                                            Keywords: mentoring; informal learning; student identities; retention


                                                                     Introduction
                                                                     Over the past three decades we have seen the emergence of new perspectives on learning,
                                                                     and it is widely recognised that learning is a social, as opposed to an individual, process.
                                                                     Rather than being about acquiring sequential cognitive skills, learning is a situated
                                                                     process where the skills, dispositions and self-knowledge that are crucial to success are
                                                                     grounded in the particular institutional environments, where students come and know and
                                                                     understand through ongoing processes of participation and engagement (Anderson and
                                                                     McCune 2013; Lave and Wenger 1991). This perspective points to a range of social
                                                                     practices through which students are supported to become successful learners such as
                                                                     peer learning, active and problem-based learning, and student mentoring (Brockbank and
                                                                     McGill 2007; Falchikov 2002). Mentoring has become ever more prominent in higher
                                                                     education as a way of enhancing the personal and professional development of the
                                                                     students, as well as of smoothing transitions into, and through, university. The value that
                                                                     universities ascribe to mentoring is often positive in nature, with high expectations about
                                                                     the benefits it brings to mentors and mentees alike (Colley 2002). Indeed, Sundli (2007,
                                                                     201) argues that mentoring has ‘become almost a new mantra for education’.
                                                                         Current trends in education suggest that mentoring is one key way to encourage
                                                                     student engagement and participation, and research has focused on two distinctive sets of
                                                                     questions about the nature of mentoring within universities. On the one hand, a body of


                                                                     *Email: hazel.christie@ed.ac.uk
                                                                     © 2014 Taylor & Francis
                                                                     956   H. Christie

                                                                     research looks to the range of forms that mentoring takes, which depend on the
                                                                     institutional context, the particular functions of the mentoring scheme, and whether the
                                                                     scheme is formal or informal in nature (Chao, Walz and Gardner 2006; Colvin & Ashman
                                                                     2010). Despite the plethora of mentoring initiatives in higher education, some consensus
                                                                     has emerged about their shared characteristics. Thus, for example, mentoring relation-
                                                                     ships tend to focus on the development of individuals, and to include broad forms of
                                                                     support, such as assistance with professional and career development (Crisp and Cruz
                                                                     2009). Further, mentoring relationships should be personal and reciprocal, and everyone
                                                                     involved in the process should benefit in some tangible way.
                                                                         On the other hand, research looks to the experience of mentoring including how
                                                                     students interact with mentoring schemes, and the extent to which this effects engagement
                                                                     and participation (Jacobi 1991). An important aspect of these studies is to investigate the
                                                                     connections between mentoring schemes and successful learning with an emphasis on




Downloaded by [The University of Edinburgh] at 02:16 31 March 2015
                                                                     how mentoring supports students to become members of a learning community (Fox et al.
                                                                     2010; Wilson et al. 2011). Other studies point to the range of potential benefits and costs
                                                                     associated with mentoring, as well as to the role of trust in developing successful
                                                                     mentoring relationships (Bouquillon, Sosik, and Lee 2005). Findings from diverse
                                                                     disciplinary backgrounds shed light on how social relations and differences, such as age,
                                                                     race and gender, influence the nature and shape of the mentoring relationships (Blake-
                                                                     Beard et al. 2011). Gender differences are apparent in that, male mentors tend to provide
                                                                     more instrumental and career support, whereas female mentorships are characterised by
                                                                     more emotional support (Bogat and Liang 2005). In terms of age, the assumption is often
                                                                     made that it is the younger person – or the protégé – who is being mentored.
                                                                         As indicated above, there is a strong presumption in policy debates that mentoring is a
                                                                     positive process that brings benefits for participants and institutions alike. Despite this –
                                                                     or perhaps because of it – critical investigations of mentoring have been limited. Colley
                                                                     (2002), for example, stresses that the popularity of mentoring has not been matched by
                                                                     similar progress in its conceptualisation. In particular, she points to the need for a detailed
                                                                     investigation of its (potential) negative effects. Important here are questions about the
                                                                     relations of power and control which inhere within the mentoring relationship, as well as
                                                                     about tacit understandings of the kinds of engagement that are encouraged within
                                                                     mentoring schemes.
                                                                         It is the intention in this paper to focus upon such questions by drawing on evidence
                                                                     from an ongoing mentoring project based at a post-1992 university in the UK. The first
                                                                     part of the paper outlines the methods used to investigate the dynamics of the mentoring
                                                                     project in the case study university. In the sections which follow, the expectations of
                                                                     mentoring’s taken-for-granted positive effects will be examined in the light of results
                                                                     showing other effects, including the extent of institutional control and the existence of
                                                                     power relations between participants. The final section of the paper turns to the
                                                                     difficulties, which arise when mentors and mentees hold competing or conflicting views
                                                                     about what constitutes the mentoring relationship, and which centre on academic skills
                                                                     development.


                                                                     Methods
                                                                     ‘Student Peer Mentoring’ is an ongoing project at a post-1992 university which is
                                                                     concerned with promoting student retention. The project matches new students (mentees)
                                                                     and experienced peers (mentors), with a view to better supporting the mentees to the
                                                                                                                           Teaching in Higher Education        957

                                                                     successful conclusion of their degrees. The programme was set up by a central university
                                                                     service to provide support for undergraduate students throughout their first year. It has a
                                                                     very clear remit: to support new students to make the transition to university; to help them
                                                                     integrate into the learning community; to encourage them to develop independent
                                                                     learning skills; and to refer them on to other sources of support when appropriate.
                                                                     Students are recruited to the scheme in September, and are encouraged to develop their
                                                                     relationship over the course of the year. The project was set up in the 2003/04 and is now
                                                                     a firmly established part of the wider landscape of support within the case study
                                                                     university.
                                                                         The paper uses secondary evidence from the project’s annual report (Case Study
                                                                     University 2012). The project report includes quantitative profiles of the participants, as
                                                                     well as discussion of the practical arrangements for the development and management of




Downloaded by [The University of Edinburgh] at 02:16 31 March 2015
                                                                     the programme. The report also includes student feedback, which was gathered from a
                                                                     standardised questionnaire sent by email to mentors and mentees in May, when the
                                                                     mentoring period was coming to an end. This questionnaire covered the regularity and
                                                                     form of meetings, topics discussed and aspects of the relationship which had proved
                                                                     beneficial.
                                                                         The data from the project report is analysed using critical discourse analysis
                                                                     (Jorgensen and Phillips 2002), which sees language as a social practice. It is not a
                                                                     methodology as such, but can perhaps be described in Van Dijk’s (1993, 131) words as ‘a
                                                                     shared perspective on doing linguistic, semiotic or discourse analysis’. For the purposes
                                                                     of this study, discourse analysis was used to facilitate a ‘critical’ reading of the mentoring
                                                                     project report from 2012 which focused on ‘making things visible’ by unpacking the
                                                                     assumptions which are often hidden in policy documents (Saarinen 2008). This meant
                                                                     undertaking a critical reading of the project report as a whole to investigate what was
                                                                     included, as well as to what was excluded. This analysis involved a detailed investigation
                                                                     of, if and how, the report used evidence from an evaluation of the mentoring project to
                                                                     construct an argument about the perceived benefits of the scheme, and how this
                                                                     contributed to a wider set of debates about student retention. The analysis also involved
                                                                     close attention to how the roles of the various actors in the process were represented
                                                                     particularly in relation to the formal processes through which the scheme operated.
                                                                         The project report comprises evidence from 175 students. Of these, 101 expressed
                                                                     interested in being a mentee, and the other 74 volunteered to become a trained mentor.
                                                                     A total of 87 mentor and mentee matches were made. The remainder of the paper draws
                                                                     on the data in the report which drew on the 87 matched pairs. The standardised
                                                                     questionnaire elicited feedback from 50 of the mentors (57%) and 56 of the mentees
                                                                     (64%). That the response rates were so high indicates the esteem in which the programme
                                                                     was held. As can be seen from Table 1, the majority of the participants were female,
                                                                     which confirms other studies which have found that women are more likely than men to
                                                                     join a mentoring scheme (Bogat and Liang 2005). Table 2 shows the age profile of the
                                                                     mentors and mentees. The great majority of both mentors and mentees were mature
                                                                     students (classed as age 21 at point of entry to university). In total, 70 of the mentees
                                                                     (80%), a further 70 mentors (80%), were 21 or over when they took part in the scheme.
                                                                     Younger students are under-represented across the scheme as a whole.
                                                                     958   H. Christie

                                                                                        Table 1. Sex of participants.

                                                                                                                   Female                        Male

                                                                                        Mentors                         65                        22
                                                                                        Mentees                         60                        27



                                                                              Table 2. Age of participants at start of mentoring relationship.

                                                                                                  18–20             21–24              25–29            30+

                                                                              Mentors               17                  26              15              29
                                                                              Mentees               17                  37              11              22




Downloaded by [The University of Edinburgh] at 02:16 31 March 2015
                                                                     Mentoring as a relationship of power and control
                                                                     Uncritical acceptance of the beneficial effects of mentoring has led to universities
                                                                     devoting more time and financial resources to mentoring programmes. Given this
                                                                     expansion, Colley (2002, 270) argues that ‘we need to understand more about the specific
                                                                     contexts of mentoring […], and about the ways in which mentors and mentees construct
                                                                     their roles’. This, points to the need to unpack the institutional context within which the
                                                                     peer mentoring project is located, with a view to better understanding the power relations,
                                                                     which inhere in the mentoring relationship. Here, a critical reading of the project report is
                                                                     illuminating, because it draws attention to presuppositions about the mentoring processes
                                                                     which are presented in a positive way in order to construct a particular view of the
                                                                     desirability of a formal mentoring scheme. Analysing these presuppositions is revealing,
                                                                     because underlying assumptions can be made visible and explicit. What this analysis
                                                                     reveals is the power of the project staff to exercise considerable influence on the
                                                                     direction, shape and ethos of the mentoring programme. This critical reading suggests
                                                                     that there are two key ways in which power and control are intrinsic to the process of
                                                                     mentoring.
                                                                         First, the report documents the management of the mentoring scheme. Reading this
                                                                     indicates that the scheme is heavily formalised. It employs one project officer, located in a
                                                                     central service, whose remit is to coordinate the programme as a whole. This person has
                                                                     responsibility for recruiting students, designing and delivering training for mentors,
                                                                     matching mentors and mentees, and the day-to-day management of the project. Presenting
                                                                     this management structure as a matter of accepted background knowledge shapes the
                                                                     view of reality that is presented (see Berger and Luckmann 1979). In this instance, the
                                                                     coordinator’s role is presented as a series of common-sense processes, thus presenting a
                                                                     hegemonic discourse, or an ideologically organised view of ‘truth’ or ‘knowledge’ (see
                                                                     also Foucault 2002) about the importance of the job that she does.
                                                                         Sbisa (1999) suggests that it is important to unpack the presuppositions involved in
                                                                     presenting new information, especially those that have to do with values, social norms or
                                                                     ideals, and that seem to present persuasive views. Reading the report with this perspective
                                                                     in mind reveals the considerable power of the project officer to shape the specific
                                                                     community of practice within which the mentoring relationships take place (Chao, Walz
                                                                     and Gardner 2006). Much of the report is taken up with documenting the nature of the
                                                                                                                                 Teaching in Higher Education           959

                                                                     training that both mentors and mentees must undertake. As such the report sets out to
                                                                     ‘persuade’ the reader that training is a simple matter of covering certain key topics:

                                                                        What is mentoring; qualities of a mentor; mentee expectations; role of the mentor; some key
                                                                        study skills; skills for mentoring; the mentoring relationship; boundaries; confidentiality;
                                                                        support services; reflection and evaluation. (Case Study University 2012, 2)

                                                                     But a more critical reading of this training package indicates the power-filled nature of
                                                                     the view of reality that is being presented to us. In particular, training for mentors is a
                                                                     source of legitimation and formalisation of the mentoring process, because the project
                                                                     officer is vested with the formal power to set the nature and content of this training.
                                                                     Indeed, it is an arena through which mentoring becomes understood as a ‘site of
                                                                     governmentality’, and thus, as a locus of power and control (Manathunga 2007).




Downloaded by [The University of Edinburgh] at 02:16 31 March 2015
                                                                         Secondly, power and control are invested in the dynamics of the working relation-
                                                                     ships between the project officer and the mentors and mentees. Research has shown that
                                                                     the success of mentor training depends on two key factors, both of which indicate
                                                                     different dimensions of the power relations between the players in the project (Colvin and
                                                                     Ashman 2010). On the one hand, all parties must be willing and able to work within
                                                                     prescribed sets of rules about the mentoring relationship. On the other, the success of
                                                                     training relies on there being clarity of expectation about the roles of the various people
                                                                     involved. Social actors have roles and the representation of these activities and roles leads
                                                                     in turn to the possibility of viewing the representations of different roles in the report. In
                                                                     this case, the analysis of social actors and their responsibilities is particularly limited to
                                                                     the representation of agency versus passivity: who is presented as active and as setting the
                                                                     agenda in the mentoring relationship, and who is presented as a passive recipient of the
                                                                     scheme.
                                                                         Again, a critical reading of the report indicates how it is the project officer who is
                                                                     represented as the active agent in the mentoring programme. A great deal of emphasis is
                                                                     placed on how she sets boundaries between her role and that of the mentor and mentees,
                                                                     and on what happens if these roles are overstepped, or if problems arise. As such, there is
                                                                     a clearly demarcated role for the project officer:

                                                                        It is stressed during the training, and in the meetings with mentees, that if any problems arise,
                                                                        students must contact the project staff. In terms of on-going support, both mentors and
                                                                        mentees were emailed every six weeks to check how things were going, which gave them an
                                                                        opportunity to raise any issues. (Case Study University 2012, 3)

                                                                     And as discourse analysis suggests, what is not said is just as significant as what is said
                                                                     (Jorgensen and Phillips 2002). Mentees, when mentioned, are positioned as passive
                                                                     recipients of the scheme; if they become troublesome, or step out of line, they must be
                                                                     referred on to the project officer for remediation.
                                                                         The operation of power and control between the project officer and the participants is
                                                                     further expressed in the existence of formal strategies to match mentors with mentees.
                                                                     Again, the report makes clear the active role that the project officer must take in ensuring
                                                                     that the process should achieve ‘best’ matches:

                                                                        We always try to match mentees with a mentor in their subject area. We also take level of
                                                                        maturity into account, as well as some aspects of character, when matching. (Case Study
                                                                        University 2012, 3)
                                                                     960   H. Christie

                                                                     The existence of a formalised process of matching, based on established sets of procedures,
                                                                     shapes and strengthens the power of the coordinator, and the representation of this in the
                                                                     report works to legitimate the practice of mentoring within the institution. It also indicates
                                                                     that what appears like a straightforward expert–novice interaction is cut across by broader
                                                                     questions of expertise, experience and power (Smith 2007). Here, the relations are strongly
                                                                     hierarchical in nature, based on the assumption that more ‘mature’ students will be able to
                                                                     help less experienced students with the transition to studying in a new learning environment
                                                                     (Falchikov, 2002). It is also clear that more value is placed on some matches than on others,
                                                                     based on judgements about ‘character’, which may be strongly mediated by sociocultural
                                                                     beliefs about class, race, age and gender. As such, the coordinator has formally sanctioned
                                                                     power to construct and control the social practices through which mentoring relationship
                                                                     takes place. Rather than taking the potential benefits of these practices at face value, this
                                                                     analysis shows that is important to unpack the relations of power and inequality that




Downloaded by [The University of Edinburgh] at 02:16 31 March 2015
                                                                     underpin the social processes of matching mentors and mentees.


                                                                     Mentoring as a social process: socialising mentees to fit in
                                                                     The mentoring relationship has increasingly become a subject of scrutiny in universities
                                                                     with research concentrating primarily on the nature of the relationship (formal or
                                                                     informal) and its function (career development and psychosocial development). As
                                                                     indicated above, a hierarchical relationship is built into the mentoring process, where the
                                                                     mentor is perceived as being in an expert position, and as being willing to induct the
                                                                     inexperienced mentee into the learning environment of the university. This is achieved
                                                                     through the mentor drawing upon tacit knowledge and understanding of the norms and
                                                                     practices of the university, and using this to encourage mentees to learn to work
                                                                     effectively within this community. Not surprisingly, a common theme in studies of the
                                                                     mentoring relationship is the power of the mentor to ensure the mentee’s success by
                                                                     passing on cultural values and norms which help them to succeed at university (Fox
                                                                     et al. 2010).
                                                                          This theme resonated with the findings presented in the report under the heading
                                                                     ‘benefits of the scheme’. Here, illustrative quotes from mentees are used to describe the
                                                                     process of being mentored which centred on the help they received to ‘fit in’ to the university
                                                                     culture. Again, by analysing these presuppositions it is possible to make the underlying
                                                                     assumptions visible and explicit. In this case, assumptions centred on the value to the
                                                                     institution of having students who would be socialised, and who would thus be more likely
                                                                     to stay on. A carefully chosen range of comments from mentees, for example, constructs a
                                                                     picture of the mentor as a guide to University life; as someone who could de-mystify
                                                                     university for the mentees by explaining how its processes and structures worked.
                                                                     A particular emphasis was on the value of this for mentees who were returning to education
                                                                     after a period away and were consciously participating in the scheme as a way to understand
                                                                     how to fit in. Mentee 41 was chosen for inclusion in the report:

                                                                        My mentor was invaluable to me at the start of my year at Uni, absolutely invaluable. As I
                                                                        was coming back as a mature student I found it very hard at the beginning and had no
                                                                        friends. I was lonely and felt I didn’t fit in so having a mentor was amazing. She was so
                                                                        friendly and that bit older too so I could relate to her.

                                                                     Similarly Mentee 25’s case was presented:
                                                                                                                                Teaching in Higher Education          961

                                                                        I think the mentoring service is great because it really helps students have the opportunity of
                                                                        settling into university life, especially if you are a mature student returning to studies and
                                                                        exams after several years away from higher education.

                                                                     A critical reading of the comments from the mentees indicates the need to examine the
                                                                     complexities that this process of socialisation reveals. The report makes the case that
                                                                     the mentoring relationship should be read in a positive fashion, because mentees were
                                                                     made to feel as part of the university norms and practices, and so were more likely to
                                                                     succeed. However, mentoring can be interpreted more critically as an instrument of
                                                                     governmentality through which the University inducts students into particular ways of
                                                                     thinking and being, such that they are more likely to succeed. In this way, retention
                                                                     figures are enhanced and mentoring becomes a site of governmentality. Again evidence
                                                                     presented in the report is used to suggest that the project had a strong role to play in




Downloaded by [The University of Edinburgh] at 02:16 31 March 2015
                                                                     helping mentees to continue with their studies, at times, when they were struggling or
                                                                     questioning their decision to be there. In total, 16% of the mentees had thought about
                                                                     leaving university in the first year, and had turned to their mentors for advice and support.
                                                                     Again, input from the mentors was represented as pivotal in their decision to remain. The
                                                                     following comments were used:

                                                                        I was about to quit but my mentor made it a bit easier to stay. (Mentee 32)


                                                                        Without my mentor’s reassurance I would have considered leaving as I would have continued
                                                                        to feel that I didn’t fit in. (Mentee 5)

                                                                     This more nuanced reading of the mentoring report indicates just how powerful a
                                                                     mechanism mentoring is from an institutional point of view. In teasing apart the
                                                                     intertwined aspects of socialisation in mentoring, the paper highlights how institutional
                                                                     power circulates through mentoring even when it is constructed as a straightforward
                                                                     process of supporting mentees.


                                                                     Crossing boundaries: advice about academic skills
                                                                     There are additional dangers in constructing mentoring as a process of socialisation,
                                                                     because it may encourage mentees to cross hidden boundaries to seek support on a range
                                                                     of academic and personal issues. It was noticeable in the report that the relationship
                                                                     between mentors and mentees tended to be perceived in a positive light when issues of
                                                                     membership and belonging were highlighted. Interesting for the purposes of this paper
                                                                     was that the report did address the problems that arose in the mentoring project. This
                                                                     section of the report was restricted to concerns about the boundaries between mentors and
                                                                     mentees. Discussion centred on active support for learning, particularly the development
                                                                     of academic skills. Again the construction of the argument in the report started from the
                                                                     positive benefits of the scheme with an emphasis on the mentees who had commented on
                                                                     the extent to which their mentors had helped them to develop their academic skills.
                                                                     Evidence was presented to suggest that mentoring was an important means of helping
                                                                     mentees to sustain their studies; indeed 83% reported that mentoring had been important
                                                                     in this respect. The illustrative quotes focused on the benefits to the mentees of receiving
                                                                     practical tips:
                                                                     962   H. Christie

                                                                        I got the advice (about writing essays) from someone who I felt know things better than me
                                                                        and who I could trust. (Mentee 50).


                                                                        My exam results improved compared to before. (Mentee 72)

                                                                     But the report also included a more wide-ranging discussion about how the help and
                                                                     advice of the mentors had enhanced the mentees’ confidence in their academic skills, and
                                                                     enabled them to develop identities as successful students:

                                                                        She was a great help with the (academic skills) issues I was concerned about. I feel a lot
                                                                        more confident about things now. She has offered to meet me next week to assess whether
                                                                        I’ve been able to put into practice all the information she has given me. (Mentee 19)




Downloaded by [The University of Edinburgh] at 02:16 31 March 2015
                                                                        I feel like I have someone who knows what I am going through in terms of keeping on top of
                                                                        workloads, research and revising. (Mentee 11)

                                                                     While mentoring can provide students with a great deal of support and motivation, there
                                                                     are dangers in constructing mentors as being in a formal position of expertise. A great
                                                                     deal of discussion in the literature focuses on this tension between formality and
                                                                     informality in mentoring, precisely because the heart of its success is thought to lie in the
                                                                     development of a trusting personal relationship. In particular, discussion of academic
                                                                     skills carries with it an ‘asymmetry of dependent trust’ (Manathunga 2007, 218). Being
                                                                     put into a position of expertise is a risky space for mentors to inhabit precisely because
                                                                     there are myriad ways in which the trusting relationship can be breached. Some of these
                                                                     dangers were recognised in the report. While the problems of the mentoring scheme were
                                                                     reported as a simple table, further analysis of them revealed two ways in which trust was
                                                                     problematic as far as the mentees’ quest to develop academic skills were concerned. First,
                                                                     tension centred on the amount of time available for academic skills development. That is,
                                                                     mentees often hoped and expected that mentors would support their learning by offering a
                                                                     more comprehensive package of study support than was realistic (see also Colvin and
                                                                     Ashman 2010). Some mentees viewed the mentor as akin to a personal tutor, and
                                                                     expected more help than was available with assessments and course work. One student
                                                                     was very critical of the help she received with studying:

                                                                        Not at all, there is (sic) still many things I would like to know about my study. (Mentee 57)

                                                                     Another mentee’s comments about her mentor were similar to the more widespread
                                                                     complaints often voiced by the student population about academic staff:

                                                                        I would have liked to have more time with my mentor and so if perhaps there was a way to
                                                                        add more structure such as dedicated appointment times then that would be good. I did feel
                                                                        that I didn’t like to bother her too much because I knew she was busy with her own work so
                                                                        if there was a way to get around that then that would be ideal. (Mentee 5)

                                                                     A second area of concern was overdependence, where mentees had enormously high
                                                                     expectations of their mentors which they could not deliver on. The evidence suggests that
                                                                     mentors were concerned about demands placed on them for academic support which they
                                                                     did not feel they could, or should, provide. One commented:
                                                                                                                                 Teaching in Higher Education           963

                                                                        I felt she was wanting me to provide more help i.e. whether she had done the work correctly
                                                                        and I suggested she speak to the lecturer for guidance. […] I felt quite bad at the time and
                                                                        thought I should have offered her more support. (Mentor 17)

                                                                     While being in a position of responsibility can be enormously powerful for students, this
                                                                     study reveals the real worries that mentors had about the mentees being dependent on
                                                                     them. This left mentors feeling overwhelmed, and mentees feeling dissatisfied, and
                                                                     echoes some of the concerns that Manathunga and Goozée (2007) outline in their study of
                                                                     the ‘always/already’ effective supervisor. One mentor reported that a mentee:

                                                                        Mentioned she was very stressed and could not cope. I tried to encourage her […]
                                                                        I concentrate on the positive things of uni, for instance the opportunity of getting a better job
                                                                        once graduated. But I cannot give her all the help and support she wants. (Mentor 45).




Downloaded by [The University of Edinburgh] at 02:16 31 March 2015
                                                                     In these ways, mentors and mentees found it difficult to negotiate the boundaries between
                                                                     providing general advice and support about university and providing in-depth academic
                                                                     skills support. This is a difficult space for the mentors to inhabit, and it is one that the
                                                                     authors of the report chose to list but not to comment on. While mentoring can be a very
                                                                     positive relationship it is important to highlight these contradictions and ambivalences so
                                                                     that we can better understand the myriad ways in which power is intrinsic to the
                                                                     mentoring relationship.


                                                                     Conclusions
                                                                     Mentoring has become an integral part of the policy agenda, being widely used in a range
                                                                     of fields from higher education to employment and training. As yet, research has been
                                                                     slow to develop critical approaches to mentoring, with little investigation of its highly
                                                                     formalised aspects or of its potentially negative effects. Most research on mentoring in
                                                                     educational settings is anchored in positive assumptions of its benefits for participants,
                                                                     from the universities themselves to the students who participate as either mentors or
                                                                     mentees. This study has sketched out the beginnings of a more critical appraisal of
                                                                     mentoring by drawing attention to three key features of a mentoring project in one
                                                                     university.
                                                                         First, it has considered mentoring as a relationship of power and control, as evident in
                                                                     the formalisation of the mentoring programme in the case study university. The existence
                                                                     of training for the mentors, as well as the process of matching mentors and mentees, is
                                                                     indicative of the formal power of the institution, embodied by the project staff, to set the
                                                                     agenda for a mentoring process, which is often uncritically assumed to be informal and
                                                                     student-directed. The analysis presented here shows that institutional mechanisms for
                                                                     legitimating and controlling the formal aspects of the mentoring relationship are of
                                                                     paramount importance to our understanding of mentoring. As Maynard argues, ‘the
                                                                     possession of mentoring skills alone will not guarantee that students receive appropriate
                                                                     support’; rather it is important ‘to analyse how participants are inducted into a particular
                                                                     vision of a mentoring relationship, with its own history and goals, and how they learn to
                                                                     work as effectively as they can within that relationship’ (2000, 29).
                                                                         Secondly, it has recognised that the mentoring process is socially constructed, and the
                                                                     relationship between the participants is tailored to supporting mentees to develop
                                                                     identities which enable them to ‘fit in’ to University life. Issues of power in these
                                                                     964    H. Christie

                                                                     relationships were not blatant, but were rather couched in terms of tacit understandings
                                                                     about the kinds of engagement, and the kinds of student identities that should be
                                                                     encouraged. The findings also indicated that mentoring can be understood as a site of
                                                                     governmentality, precisely because the forms of engagement deemed as desirable are
                                                                     those which enable students to become successful learners. As such, mentoring is
                                                                     harnessed to a wider set of debates about retention. This suggests that institutional power
                                                                     is always present in the mentoring relationship, and that, it is ‘not an innocent, collegial
                                                                     practice’ (Manathanga 2007, 218).
                                                                         Finally, the paper has demonstrated that there are dangers in the mentoring process
                                                                     which centre on positioning mentors as experts, and which involve disruption to the trust
                                                                     which is through to lie at the heart of good mentoring relationships (Bouquillon, Sosik,
                                                                     and Lee 2005). Some of the issues this raises, including the nature of the boundaries




Downloaded by [The University of Edinburgh] at 02:16 31 March 2015
                                                                     between mentors and mentees, crystallised around issues of academic study support.
                                                                     While there are many pleasures of mentoring, including feeling supported in the daunting
                                                                     process of becoming a university student, there are also significant risks. Particularly for
                                                                     mentees, there is the inherent risk of wanting more academic support from the scheme
                                                                     than is available, and of feeling that their trust in the mentor to deliver has been breached.
                                                                     This is not to dismiss mentoring but to suggest that research needs to pay attention to the
                                                                     relations of power and control that are inherent to the mentoring relationship, and to
                                                                     challenge the assumption that mentoring is a positive force that universities should
                                                                     promote in an uncritical fashion.

                                                                     References
                                                                     Anderson, C., and V. McCune. 2013. “Fostering Meaning, Fostering Community.” Higher
                                                                       Education 66 (3): 283–296. doi:10.1007/s10734-012-9604-6.
                                                                     Berger, P., and T. Luckmann. 1979. The Social Construction of Reality. Harmondsworth: Peregrine
                                                                       Books.
                                                                     Blake-Beard, S., M. Bayne, F. Crosby, and C. Muller. 2011. “Matching by Race and Gender in
                                                                       Mentoring Relationships: Keeping Our Eyes on the Prize.” Journal of Social Issues 67 (3): 622–643.
                                                                       doi:10.1111/j.1540-4560.2011.01717.x.
                                                                     Bogat, G. A., and B. Liang. 2005. “Gender in Mentoring Relationships.” In Handbook of Youth
                                                                       Mentoring, edited by D. L. DuBois and M. J. Karcher, 205–219. Thousand Oaks: Sage.
                                                                     Bouquillon, E. A., J. J. Sosik, and D. Lee. 2005. “It’s Only a Phase: Examining Trust, Identification
                                                                       and Mentoring Functions Received across the Mentoring Phases.” Mentoring & Tutoring:
                                                                       Partnership in Learning 13 (2): 239–258. doi:10.1080/13611260500105808.
                                                                     Brockbank, A., and I. McGill. 2007. Facilitating Reflective Learning in Higher Education. 2nd ed.
                                                                       Maidenhead: Open University Press.
                                                                     Case Study University. 2012. Student Mentoring at Case Study University: Summary Report 2011–12.
                                                                       Case Study University, Edinburgh: Student and Academic Services.
                                                                     Chao, G. T., P. Walz, and P. D. Gardner. 2006. “Formal and Informal Mentorships: A Comparison
                                                                       on Mentoring Functions and Contrast with Nonmentored Counerparts.” Personnel Psychology
                                                                       45 (3): 619–636. doi:10.1111/j.1744-6570.1992.tb00863.x.
                                                                     Colley, H. 2002. Mentoring for Social Inclusion: A Critical Approach to Nurturing Mentor
                                                                       Relationships. London: Routledge.
                                                                     Colvin, J. W., and M. Ashman. 2010. “Roles, Risks, and Benefits of Peer Mentoring Relationships in
                                                                       Higher Education.” Mentoring & Tutoring: Partnership in Learning 18 (2): 121–134. doi:10.1080/
                                                                       13611261003678879.
                                                                     Crisp, G., and I. Cruz. 2009. “Mentoring College Students: A Critical Review of the Literature
                                                                       between 1990 and 2007.” Research in Higher Education 50 (6): 525–545. doi:10.1007/s11162-
                                                                       009-9130-2.
                                                                     Falchikov, N. 2002. Learning Together: Peer Tutoring in Higher Education. London: Routledge.
                                                                     Foucault, M. 2002. An Archaeology of Knowledge. London: Routledge.
                                                                                                                              Teaching in Higher Education        965

                                                                     Fox, A., L. Stevenson, P. Connelly, A. Duff, and A. Dunlop. 2010. “Peer-mentoring Undergraduate
                                                                       Accounting Students: The Influence on Approaches to Learning and Academic Performance.”
                                                                       Active Learning in Higher Education 11 (2): 145–156. doi:10.1177/1469787410365650.
                                                                     Jacobi, M. 1991. “Mentoring and Undergraduate Academic Success: A Literature Review.” Review
                                                                       of Educational Research 61 (4): 505–532. doi:10.3102/00346543061004505.
                                                                     Jorgensen, M., and L. Phillips. 2002. Discourse Analysis as Theory and Method. London: SAGE.
                                                                     Lave, J., and E. Wenger. 1991. “Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation.” In
                                                                       Learning in Doing, edited by R. Pea and J. S. Brown, 62–74. Cambridge: Cambridge University
                                                                       Press.
                                                                     Manathunga, C. 2007. “Supervision as Mentoring: The Role of Power and Boundary Crossing.”
                                                                       Studies in Continuing Education 29 (2): 207–221.
                                                                     Manathunga, C., and J. Goozée. 2007. “Challenging the Dual Assumption of the ‘Always/Already’
                                                                       Autonomous Student and Effective Supervisor.” Teaching in Higher Education 12 (3): 309–322.
                                                                     Maynard, T. 2000. “Learning to Teach or Learning to Manage Mentors? Experiences of School-
                                                                       based Teacher Training.” Mentoring & Tutoring 8 (1): 17–30.




Downloaded by [The University of Edinburgh] at 02:16 31 March 2015
                                                                     Saarinen, T. 2008. “Position of Text and Discourse Analysis in Higher Education Policy Research.”
                                                                       Studies in Higher Education 33 (6): 719–728. doi:10.1080/03075070802457090.
                                                                     Sbisa, M. 1999. “Ideology and the Persuasive Use of Presupposition.” In Language and Ideology:
                                                                       Selected Papers from the 6th International Pragmatics Conference, edited by J. Verschueren,
                                                                       Vol. 1, 492–509. Antwerp: International Pragmatics Association.
                                                                     Smith, E. R. 2007. “Negotiating Power and Pedagogy in Student Teaching: Expanding and Shifting
                                                                       Roles in Expert–novice Discourse.” Mentoring & Tutoring: Partnership in Learning 15 (1): 87–106.
                                                                       doi:10.1080/13611260601037405.
                                                                     Sundli, L. 2007. “Mentoring—A New Mantra for Education?” Teaching and Teacher Education
                                                                       23 (2): 201–214. doi:10.1016/j.tate.2006.04.016.
                                                                     Van Dijk, T. A. 1993. “Editor’s Foreword to Critical Discourse Analysis.” Discourse and Society
                                                                       4 (2): 131–132. doi:10.1177/0957926593004002001.
                                                                     Wilson, Z. S., L. Holmes, K. deGravelles, M. R. Sylvain, L. Batiste, M. Johnson, and I. M. Warner.
                                                                       2011. “Hierarchical Mentoring: A Transformative Strategy for Improving Diversity and Retention
                                                                       in Undergraduate STEM Disciplines.” Journal of Science Education and Technology 21 (1):
                                                                       148–156. doi:10.1007/s10956-011-9292-5.
