CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY

REPORTER
No 6763                                 We d n e sday 11 D ecember 2024                           V ol clv N o 12



CONTENTS
Notices                                                   Obituaries
  Calendar                                          183     Obituary Notice                                  190
  Discussion on Tuesday, 21 January 2025            183   Graces
  Election of a member of the Council’s Finance             Grace submitted to the Regent House on
    Committee in class (b)                          183        11 December 2024                              190
  Elections to the Council                          183   Acta
  Anti-slavery and anti-trafficking statement and           Approval of Grace submitted to the
    policy                                          185        Regent House on 27 November 2024              190
Vacancies, appointments, etc.
  Appointment                                       186   End of the Official Part of the ‘Reporter’
  Elections to the Slade Professorship
    of Fine Art, 2025–2030                          186   College Notices
                                                            Vacancies                                        191
Notices by the General Board
  Academic Career Pathways, 2025 exercises:               External Notices
    Committee memberships                           187     Oxford Notices                                   191




PUB L I SHE D B Y A U T H O R IT Y		
183 CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY REPORTER                                                                                 11 December 2024

NOTICES

Calendar
18 December, Wednesday. Last ordinary issue of the Reporter in Michaelmas Term.
19 December, Thursday. Michaelmas Term ends.
25 December, Wednesday. Christmas Day. Scarlet Day.
 5 January, Sunday. Lent Term begins.
 8 January, Wednesday. First ordinary issue of the Reporter in Lent Term.
21 January, Tuesday. Full Term begins. Ballot of the Regent House, voting opens at 10 a.m. Discussion by videoconference
   at 2 p.m. (see below).


Discussion on Tuesday, 21 January 2025
The Vice‑Chancellor invites members of the Regent House, University and College employees, registered students and
others qualified under the regulations for Discussions (Statutes and Ordinances, p. 111) to attend a Discussion
by videoconference on Tuesday, 21 January 2025 at 2 p.m. The following items will be discussed:
   1.   Annual Report of the Council for the academic year 2023–24 (Reporter, 6762, 2024–25, p. 152).
   2.   Annual Report of the General Board to the Council for the academic year 2023–24 (Reporter, 6762, 2024–25, p. 160).
Those wishing to join the Discussion by videoconference should email UniversityDraftsman@admin.cam.ac.uk from their
University email account, providing their CRSid (if a member of the collegiate University), by 10 a.m. on the date of the
Discussion to receive joining instructions. Alternatively contributors may email their remarks to contact@proctors.cam.ac.uk,
copying ReporterEditor@admin.cam.ac.uk, by no later than 10 a.m. on the day of the Discussion for reading out by the
Proctors,1 or may ask someone else who is attending to read the remarks on their behalf.
   In accordance with the regulations for Discussions, the Chair of the Board of Scrutiny or any ten members of the
Regent House2 may request that the Council arrange for one or more of the items listed for discussion to be discussed in
person (usually in the Senate-House). Requests should be made to the Registrary, on paper or by email to
UniversityDraftsman@admin.cam.ac.uk from addresses within the cam.ac.uk domain, by no later than 9 a.m. on the day
of the Discussion. Any changes to the Discussion schedule will be confirmed in the Reporter at the earliest opportunity.
   General information on Discussions is provided on the University Governance site at https://www.governance.cam.ac.uk/
governance/decision-making/discussions/.
   1
     Any comments sent by email should please begin with the name and title of the contributor as they wish it to be read out and include
at the start a note of any College and/or Departmental affiliations held.
   2
     https://www.scrutiny.cam.ac.uk/ and https://www.admin.cam.ac.uk/reporter/regent_house_roll/section1.shtml.


Election of a member of the Council’s Finance Committee in class (b)
A vacancy will arise on the Council’s Finance Committee for a member of the Regent House, elected by representatives
of the Colleges, to serve for three years from 1 January 2025.
   The election will be conducted in accordance with the Single Transferable Vote regulations. Voting will be by postal ballot.
   Nominations should be made in writing and received by the Director of Governance and Compliance by 12 noon on
Friday, 20 December 2024. They can be submitted by email to HdGCDEA@admin.cam.ac.uk, or c/o University Offices,
The Old Schools, Cambridge, CB2 1TN, and must include a statement by the person nominated that they are willing to
serve on the Finance Committee. Nominations should be supported by the signatures of two members of the Regent House.
   If a ballot is necessary, papers will be dispatched by Friday, 10 January, for return by 12 noon on Tuesday, 21 January 2025.


Elections to the Council
5 December 2024
The Vice-Chancellor announces that the following have been elected to serve as members of the Council in the classes
shown for four years from 1 January 2025:
  Class (b) (two from among the Professors, Clinical Professors, Readers and Professors (Grade 11)):
    Professor Daniela De Angelis
    Professor Garth Nathan Wells, JE
  Class (c) (four from among the other members of the Regent House):
    Dr William John Astle
    Dr Ella Elizabeth McPherson, Q
    Dr Ewa Janina Marek, JE
    Dr Pieter Jacob van Houten, CHU
Details of the poll and the transfer of votes under the Single Transferable Vote regulations (Statutes and Ordinances, p. 121)
are as shown below.
Election in class (b)
Number of valid votes cast: 1,907 (no invalid votes)      (Quota: 636)
                                                                                         Transfer of
                                                                Transfer of               Professor
                                                     First       Professor     Second    Chhowalla’s    Third
                                                     count     Sayed’s votes    count       votes       count    Result
                                                                                                                                                                                   11 December 2024


 Professor Manish Udesing Chhowalla, CHU               228         +21           249       -249           –
 Professor Daniela De Angelis                          579         +32           611       +60           671     First elected
 Professor Manali Sudhir Desai, N                      357         +73           430       +44           474
 Professor Yusuf Mohamed Sayed                         204        -204            –          –            –
 Professor Garth Nathan Wells, JE                      539         +26           565       +79           644     Second elected
 Non-transferable                                      –            52            52         66          118

 Total                                               1,907                     1,907                   1,907


Election in class (c)
Number of valid votes cast: 1,865 (no invalid votes)      (Quota: 373)
                                                                Transfer of              Transfer of              Transfer of             Transfer of
                                                     First      Dr Astle’s     Second    Dr Qato’s      Third    Dr Matthams’ Fourth      Dr Marek’s     Fifth
                                                     count        surplus       count       votes       count        votes    count         surplus      count    Result
 Dr William John Astle                                 473        -100          373          –          373           –          373          –          373      First elected
 Dr Ella Elizabeth McPherson, Q                        354        +24.8         378.8        –          378.8         –          378.8        –          378.8    Second elected
 Dr Ewa Janina Marek, JE                               272        +18.91        290.91     +17.93       308.84      +80          388.84      -15.84      373      Third elected
 Dr Thomas James Matthams, CHR                         199        +18.6         217.6       +2          219.6      -219.6          –          –            –
 Dr Mezna Qato, N                                      175          +6.2        181.2     -181.2          –           –            –          –            –
 Dr Ellen Quigley, JE                                  200        +14.26        214.26     +65.48       279.74      +22.65       302.39      +6          308.39
 Dr Pieter Jacob van Houten, CHU                       192        +16.12        208.12     +32.86       240.98      +70.75       311.73      +9.6        321.33   Fourth elected
 Non-transferable                                                    1.11         1.11      62.93        64.04       46.2        110.24        0.24      110.48

 Total                                               1,865                     1,865                   1,865                 1,865                      1,865
                                                                                                                                                                                   CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY REPORTER 184
185 CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY REPORTER                                                                        11 December 2024

Anti-slavery and anti-trafficking statement and policy
5 December 2024
In accordance with Section 54 of the Modern Slavery Act 2015, the University is required to prepare an anti-slavery and
anti-trafficking statement for each financial year, setting out what steps it has taken to ensure that modern slavery is not
taking place in its business or supply chains. The University’s statement for the financial year ended 31 July 2024 is
published below, together with its policy on the issue.

Anti-slavery and anti-trafficking statement for the financial year ending 31 July 2024
(pursuant to Section 54(1) of the Modern Slavery Act 2015)

Legal status and activities
The University of Cambridge is a common law corporation and is an exempt charity under the Charities Act 2011.
The incorporation of the University was confirmed by the Oxford and Cambridge Act 1571, which confirmed its corporate
title of ‘The Chancellor, Masters, and Scholars of the University of Cambridge’. The University operates in the higher
education sector and consists of academic Schools, Faculties and Departments, libraries and other collections,
administrative departments and, for the purposes of this statement, includes its wholly owned companies as listed in the
University’s Financial Statements.1 Its mission is to contribute to society through the pursuit of education, learning, and
research at the highest international levels of excellence.
    Cambridge University Press & Assessment (which provides publishing and examination services) is a department of
the University rather than a separate legal entity. However, it has broader supply chains and consequently has produced
its own anti-slavery and anti-trafficking statement.2

Policy
The University has implemented an Anti-slavery and anti-trafficking policy (published below) reflecting its commitment
to combatting slavery and human trafficking and to acting with integrity in all its dealings, relationships, and supply
chains. The policy outlines how the University’s various procurement and HR practices, policies and procedures ensure
compliance with its policy commitment.

Activity in the year ending 31 July 2024
Throughout 2023–24, the University has continued to run the various controls and activities outlined in its policy, notably
through the continued use of its online training module on this topic, which was reviewed and updated this year, and the
ongoing operation of established supplier due diligence and approval procedures. In addition to those existing controls
and activities, the University has introduced a Supplier Code of Conduct as a further safeguard against its indirect
involvement in modern slavery or human trafficking. As before, it added its statement for the previous financial year
(2022–23) to the national Modern Slavery Statement Registry. It continued to ensure that modern slavery considerations
remain embedded appropriately within its ongoing Procurement transformation programme.
   The University did not receive any reports of instances of modern slavery or human trafficking in the financial year
ending 31 July 2024.
   The University will continue to raise awareness of modern slavery and human trafficking and of the need for proper
due diligence and risk assessment processes to be applied by staff and suppliers, in accordance with its policy.
This annual statement was approved by the Council on 5 December 2024.
  1
      See https://www.governance.cam.ac.uk/committees/finance-committee/Pages/fmi.aspx.
  2
      https://www.cambridge.org/people-and-planet/anti-slavery-and-human-trafficking.

Anti-slavery and anti-trafficking policy
Modern slavery encompasses slavery, forced and compulsory labour, and human trafficking whereby individuals are
deprived of their freedom and are exploited for commercial or personal gain as defined in the Modern Slavery Act 2015.
The University is committed to combatting slavery and human trafficking and to acting with integrity in all its dealings,
relationships, and supply chains. It expects the same high standards from all its staff, suppliers, contractors, and those
with whom it does business. This policy applies to all employees, workers, consultants, and other persons doing business
with the University including all its wholly owned companies, contractors, and suppliers. It does not, however, apply to
Cambridge University Press & Assessment, which operates its own procedures and has developed its own policy.1
   The University acknowledges the risk that a supply chain may involve the use of a hidden or unknown subcontractor
reliant on forced labour. Although the University as a higher education institution considers the risk of modern slavery to
be low due to the nature of its supply chains, it takes its responsibilities to combat modern slavery seriously as demonstrated
by its promotion and adoption of the following policy measures:
   •    The prevention, detection, and reporting of modern slavery in any part of its business or supply chains is the
        responsibility of all those working for the University or under its control.
   •    Appropriate due diligence processes must be carried out in relation to modern slavery which may include
        considering human rights in a sector or country, the type of sector in which a service provider operates, the
        countries from which services are provided, the nature of relationships with suppliers, and the complexity of
        supply chain(s).

  1
      https://www.cambridge.org/people-and-planet/anti-slavery-and-human-trafficking.
11 December 2024                                                           CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY REPORTER 186

   •    All supply chain lines need to be periodically risk assessed and managed in relation to modern slavery and checks
        conducted on high-risk suppliers. The University’s standard procurement and contract procedures and
        documentation2 address anti-slavery and anti-trafficking. The procurement source to contract portal requires
        suppliers to sign up to the Supplier Code of Conduct, which includes compliance with the Modern Slavery Act
        2015 as part of due diligence processes. Under the supplier approval process the University’s Finance Division
        reviews all new suppliers, any changes to existing suppliers and re-activation requests taking this into account.
   •    The University has developed an online training module on anti-slavery and anti-trafficking and completion is
        required or encouraged for a range of relevant new and existing employees, including all Finance Division staff
        and those in financial or purchasing roles across the wider University.
   •    The University highlights modern slavery issues within its ongoing communications programmes with the
        University’s Departments, Faculties and other Institutions and with current trade suppliers to maintain and
        increase awareness of the issue.
   •    The University encourages anyone to raise any concerns about modern slavery, using its whistleblowing policy3
        if necessary, and will support anyone who acts in good faith.
   •    The University’s recruitment, Dignity @ Work, equalities, and remuneration and reward policies and procedures4
        support its efforts to combat modern slavery and human trafficking.
   •    The University will continue to develop its commitment to combat modern slavery and human trafficking and will
        outline such activities within its annual anti-slavery and anti-trafficking statement.
Any breaches of this policy may result in the University taking disciplinary action against individual(s) and/or terminating
its relationship with any organization or supplier.
This policy is managed by the Governance and Compliance Division and was last approved by the Council on 5 December 2024.

  2
     See https://www.procurement.admin.cam.ac.uk/supplier-portal/general-conditions-purchase.
  3
     https://www.hr.admin.cam.ac.uk/policies-procedures/whistleblowing-policy-public-disclosure-university-employees.
  4
     Respectively: https://www.hr.admin.cam.ac.uk/recruitment-guidance; https://www.hr.admin.cam.ac.uk/policies-procedures/dignity-work-
policy; https://www.hr.admin.cam.ac.uk/policies-procedures/equal-opportunities-policy; https://www.hr.admin.cam.ac.uk/pay-benefits/pay.



VA C A N C I E S , A P P O I N T M E N T S , E T C .

Appointment
The following appointment has been made:
Professor Gishan Dissanaike, M.Phil., Ph.D., T, Adam Smith Professor of Corporate Governance, Judge Business School,
appointed Director of Judge Business School with effect from 1 December 2024.


Elections to the Slade Professorship of Fine Art, 2025–2030
The following persons have been elected by the ad hoc Board of Electors to the Slade Professorship of Fine Art:
  2025–26       Professor Terence Smith, University of Pittsburgh
  2026–27       Professor Eyal Weizman, Goldsmiths, University of London
  2027–28       Professor Tamar Garb, University College London
  2028–29       Professor Stephen Campbell, Johns Hopkins University
  2029–30       Dr Nicholas Cullinan, The British Museum
187 CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY REPORTER                                                                 11 December 2024

NOTICES BY THE GENERAL BOARD

Academic Career Pathways, 2025 exercises: Committee memberships
The General Board have appointed the following as members of committees for the Academic Career Pathways
1 October 2025 exercises in both Research and Teaching and Teaching and Scholarship, which will run in parallel.
Further information on the Academic Career Pathways is available at https://www.acp.hr.admin.cam.ac.uk/ (R&T) and
https://www.acptands.hr.admin.cam.ac.uk/ (T&S).

Vice-Chancellor’s Committee
The Vice-Chancellor, Professor Deborah Prentice (Chair)
Professor Peter Haynes (Arts and Humanities)
Professor Julian Rayner (Biological Sciences)
Professor George Malliaras (Clinical Medicine)
Professor Simon Goldhill (Humanities and Social Sciences)
Professor Clemens Kaminski (Physical Sciences)
Professor Serena Best (Technology)
Professor Kamal Munir (Pro-Vice-Chancellor for University Community and Engagement)
Dr Michael Glover (Academic Secretary)
Ms Andrea Hudson (Secretary)
Externals:
Professor Gesine Manuwald, University College London (Arts and Humanities)
Professor Susan Wray, University of Liverpool (Biological Sciences)
Professor Yvonne Barnett, Anglia Ruskin University (Clinical Medicine)
Professor Niamh Moloney, London School of Economics and Political Science (Humanities and Social Sciences)
Professor Julia Yeomans, University of Oxford (Physical Sciences)
Professor Jaafar Elmirghani, King’s College London (Technology)

School Committees

Arts and Humanities                                       Humanities and Social Sciences
Professor Peter Haynes (Chair)                            Professor Simon Goldhill (Chair)
Professor Gesine Manuwald (External)                      Professor Niamh Moloney (External)
Professor Rodrigo Cacho                                   Professor Jennifer Gabrys
Professor Máire Ni Mhaonaigh                              Professor Timothy Harper
Professor Michael Potter                                  Professor Alexey Onatskiy
Professor Jocelyn Wyburd                                  Professor Helen Thompson
Ms Mihaela Danyek (Secretary)                             Mr Justin Greene (Secretary)

Biological Sciences                                       Physical Sciences
Professor Julian Rayner (Chair)                           Professor Clemens Kaminski (Chair)
Professor Susan Wray (External)                           Professor Julia Yeomans (External)
Professor Richard Pasco Fearon                            Professor Natalia Berloff
Professor Laura Machesky                                  Professor Catherine Clarke
Professor Jon Simons                                      Professor Nigel Peake
Professor Alexander Webb                                  Professor Bhaskar Vira
TBC (Secretary)                                           Professor David Wales
                                                          Ms Louise Akroyd (Secretary)
Clinical Medicine
Professor George Malliaras (Chair)                        Technology
Professor Yvonne Barnett (External)                       Professor Serena Best (Chair)
Professor Folma Buss                                      Professor Jaafar Elmirghani (External)
Professor Ismaa Sadaf Farooqi                             Professor John Durrell
Professor Tamsin Ford                                     Professor Dame Lynn Gladden
Professor Brian Huntly                                    Professor Richard Penty
Professor Patrick Maxwell                                 Professor Peter Sewell
Ms Michelle Jones (Secretary)                             Professor Paul Tracey
                                                          Professor Garth Wells
                                                          Ms Tracy Brooks (Secretary)
11 December 2024                                        CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY REPORTER 188

Faculty Committees

1. School of Arts and Humanities                    4. School of the Humanities and Social Sciences
Combined Faculty Committee One:                     Economics
Architecture and History of Art, English, Music,    Professor Oliver Linton (Chair)
Philosophy, and Divinity                            Professor Dame Diane Coyle*
Professor Alexander Marr (Chair)                    Professor Meredith Crowley
Professor Charles Forsdick*                         Professor Matthew Elliott
Professor Richard Dance                             Professor Eric French
Professor Robert Hedley                             Professor Constantine Yannelis
Professor Rae Langton                               Dr Susan Wan (Secretary)
Professor Raphael Lyne
Professor Nicholas Marston                          Education
Professor Flora Samuel                              Professor Karen Coats (Chair)
Ms Lucy Matthews (Secretary)                        TBC*
                                                    Professor Jason Arday
Combined Faculty Committee Two:                     Professor Sara Baker
Classics, Modern and Medieval Languages and
                                                    Professor Clare Brooks
Linguistics, and Asian and Middle Eastern Studies
                                                    Professor Hilary Cremin
Professor Emma Widdis (Chair)                       Professor Jenny Gibson
Professor Esra Ozyurek*                             Professor Sara Hennessy
Professor Mikael Adolphson                          Professor Rupert Wegerif
Professor Amira Bennison                            Ms Thury Agustsdottir (Secretary)
Professor Gabor Betegh
Professor Robert Gordon                             History
Professor Emily Gowers                              Professor John Arnold (Chair)
Professor Karen Ottewell                            Professor Sriya Iyer*
Professor Brechtje Post                             Professor Annabel Brett
Mr Nigel Thompson (Secretary)                       Professor Sir Christopher Clark
                                                    Professor Mary Laven
2. School of the Biological Sciences                Professor Sujit Sivasundaram
Biology and Veterinary Medicine                     Professor Alexandra Walsham
Professor Beverley Glover (Chair)                   Dr Elizabeth Haresnape (Secretary)
Professor Karen Ersche*
Professor Sarah Bray                                Human, Social and Political Sciences and
                                                    the Department of History and Philosophy of Science
Professor Abigail Fowden
Professor Julian Hibberd                            Professor John Robb (Chair)
Professor Mark Holmes                               Professor Alexander Jeffrey*
Professor Mark Johnson                              Professor Patrick Baert
Professor Rebecca Kilner                            Professor Hasok Chang
Professor Eric Miska                                Professor Mette Eilstrup-Sangiovanni
Professor Steven Russell                            Professor Sian Lazar
Professor Ewan St John Smith                        Ms Marie Butcher (Secretary)
Professor Suzanne Turner                            Law, Land Economy, and Criminology
Dr Sarah Green (Secretary)
                                                    Professor Alexandra Walsham (Chair)*
3. School of Clinical Medicine                      Professor Claire Colomb
                                                    Professor Martin Dixon
Clinical Medicine
                                                    Professor Manuel Eisner
Professor Edward Bullmore (Chair)                   Professor Shailaja Fennell
Professor Angela Roberts*                           Professor Eilís Ferran
Professor Mary Dixon-Woods                          Professor Henning Grosse Ruse-Khan
Professor Rebecca Fitzgerald                        Professor Louise Gullifer
Professor Richard Gilbertson                        Professor Sivakumaran
Professor Judy Hirst                                Professor Leo Zaibert
Professor Matthew Lambon Ralph                      Ms Laura Smethurst (Secretary)
Professor Andrew McCaskie
Professor Susan Ozanne
Professor David Rowitch
Professor Marc Tischkowitz
Dr Litsa Biggs (Secretary)

*Member appointed external to the Faculty.
189 CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY REPORTER                                                 11 December 2024

Faculty Committees, continued

5. School of the Physical Sciences           6. School of Technology
Earth Sciences and Geography                 Business and Management
Professor Marie Edmonds (Chair)              Professor Jaideep Prabhu (Chair)
Professor Ruth Cameron*                      Professor Matthew Elliott*
Professor Sally Gibson                       Professor Shahzad Ansari
Professor Michael Hulme                      Professor Gishan Dissanaike
Professor Christine Lane                     Professor Elizabeth George
Professor Marc Macias-Fauria                 Professor Jennifer Howard-Grenville
Professor John Maclennan                     Professor Bart Lambrecht
Professor Emma Mawdsley                      Professor Feryal Erhun Oguz
Professor Nicholas Tosca                     Professor Lucia Reisch
Dr Adam Strange (Secretary)                  Professor Rafael Lopes Rogo
                                             Ms Kal Sandhu (Secretary)
Mathematics
Professor Benjamin Allanach (Chair)          Computer Science and Technology
Professor Ulrike Tillman*                    Professor Timothy Jones (Chair)
Professor Michael Cates                      Professor Joan Lasenby*
Professor Colm-cille Caulfield               Professor Alastair Beresford
Professor Nicholas Dorey                     Professor Marcelo Fiore
Professor Richard Samworth                   Professor Cecilia Mascolo
Professor Carola Schönlieb                   Professor Richard Mortier
Professor Ivan Smith                         Ms Caroline Stewart (Secretary)
Professor Jack Thorne
Professor Wendelin Werner                    Engineering and
                                             Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology
Ms Rachel Plunkett (Secretary)
                                             Professor Colm Durkan (Chair)
Physics and Chemistry                        Professor Clare Bryant*
Professor Caterina Ducati (Chair)            Professor Holger Babinsky
Professor Alice Reid*                        Professor Andrew Flewitt
Professor Stuart Althorpe                    Professor Simon Godsill
Professor Mete Atature                       Professor Timothy Minshall
Professor Vasily Belokurov                   Professor Roisin Owens
Professor Ruth Cameron                       Professor Alexander Routh
Professor Matthew Gaunt                      Professor Michael Sutcliffe
Professor James Keeler                       Professor Giulia Viggiani
Professor Jason Robinson                     Ms Leesa Osborn (Secretary)
Professor Charles Smith
Professor Mark Wyatt
Ms Angela Macharia (Secretary)

*Member appointed external to the Faculty.
11 December 2024                                                              CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY REPORTER 190

OBITUARIES

Obituary Notice
The Revd Andrew Alexander Macintosh, M.A., D.D., Fellow and formerly Chaplain, Dean, College Lecturer,
Supervisor and Director of Studies in Theology, Tutor and President of St John’s College, sometime Affiliated Lecturer
in the Faculties of Divinity and of Asian and Middle Eastern Studies and Associate Lecturer in Hebrew at the Faculty of
Divinity, died on 5 December 2024, aged 87 years.


GRACES

Grace submitted to the Regent House on 11 December 2024
The Council submits the following Grace to the Regent House. This Grace, unless it is withdrawn or a ballot is requested
in accordance with the regulations for Graces of the Regent House (Statutes and Ordinances, p. 112), will be deemed to
have been approved at 4 p.m. on Friday, 20 December 2024. Further information on requests for a ballot or the amendment
of Graces is available to members of the Regent House on the Regent House Petitions site.§

1. Notwithstanding Regulation 11 of the Ordinance for Payments Additional to Stipend and Regulation 1 of
the Ordinance for the Pro-Vice-Chancellors (Statutes and Ordinances, p. 688 and p. 691), that the
Vice‑Chancellor be permitted to confer the title of Senior Pro-Vice-Chancellor on two Pro-Vice-Chancellors
from 1 January 2025 until 30 September 2027 and the Council to authorise pensionable payments additional
to stipend to both holders of the title, provided that those payments shall not exceed the amount that would
have been payable to one Senior Pro-Vice-Chancellor.1
  1
    The holder of the title of Senior Pro-Vice-Chancellor takes responsibility for leading and co-ordinating the work of the
Pro‑Vice‑Chancellors and receives an additional payment in recognition of the extra responsibility. After consulting with all of those
appointed to the office of Pro-Vice-Chancellor, the Vice-Chancellor would like to confer the title of Senior Pro-Vice-Chancellor on
two Pro-Vice-Chancellors, so that they can share the additional responsibility. As the regulations only envisage the Vice-Chancellor
conferring the title on one individual, the Council is submitting a Grace to seek approval, on this occasion, for the conferment of the title
on two Pro‑Vice-Chancellors and for the payment to be shared between them.
  §
      See https://www.governance.cam.ac.uk/governance/key-bodies/RH-Senate/Pages/RH-Petitions.aspx for details.



A C TA

Approval of Grace submitted to the Regent House on 27 November 2024
The Grace submitted to the Regent House on 27 November 2024 (Reporter, 6761, 2024–25, p. 147) was approved at
4 p.m. on Friday, 6 December 2024.




E. M. C. RAMPTON, Registrary
E N D O F T H E O F F I C I A L PA R T O F T H E ‘ R E P O R T E R ’
191 CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY REPORTER                                                                                    11 December 2024

COLLEGE NOTICES                                                         EXTERNAL NOTICES

Vacancies                                                              Oxford Notices
Corpus Christi College: Visiting Professorships, 2025–26;              Harris Manchester College: Principal; tenure: from
two available: one in Michaelmas Term (October to                      1 October 2025 for seven years (with the possibility of
December 2025) and one in Lent Term (January to March                  renewal for a further three years); closing date (extended):
2026); closing date: 12 February 2025 at 12 noon; further              10 January 2025; further details:
details: https://www.corpus.cam.ac.uk/about/opportunities/             https://www.minervasearch.com/hmc
visiting-professorships-and-visiting-fellowships
                                                                       Lady Margaret Hall: College Stipendiary Lectureship(s) in
   Pacific Islander Visiting Fellowship; tenure: for up to
                                                                       Physics (one 6-hour or two 3-hour Lectureships); tenure:
six weeks in summer 2025 (mid-July to mid-September);
                                                                       from as soon as possible until the end of August 2028;
non-stipendiary but benefits apply; closing date:
                                                                       salary: £17,491–£18,308 (6 hours) or £8,746–£9,154
12 February 2025 at 12 noon; further details:
                                                                       (3 hours); closing date: 3 January 2025 at 12 noon; further
https://www.corpus.cam.ac.uk/about/opportunities/
                                                                       details: https://lmh.pinpointhq.com
visiting-professorships-and-visiting-fellowships
                                                                       St Catherine’s College: Communications and Marketing
Girton College: Research Fellowship in Arts 2025
                                                                       Manager; salary: £46,735–£55,755; closing date:
(Asian and Middle Eastern Studies; Anglo-Saxon, Norse
                                                                       6 January 2025 at 12 noon; further details:
and Celtic Studies; English; Linguistics; or Modern and
                                                                       https://www.stcatz.ox.ac.uk/communications-marketing-
Medieval Languages); tenure: three years from 1 October
                                                                       manager-closing-date-6-january/
2025; salary: £25,433–£28,081 (post-Ph.D.) or
£24,600–£26,642 (pre‑Ph.D.); closing date: 13 January
2025 at 9 a.m.; further details: https://www.girton.cam.ac.uk/
job-vacancies/research-fellowship-arts-2025
   Research Fellowship in Science 2025 (non-stipendiary);
open to those in any science subject; tenure: three years
from 1 October 2025; closing date: 13 January 2025 at
9 a.m.; further details: https://www.girton.cam.ac.uk/job-
vacancies/research-fellowship-science-2025-non-
stipendiary

Magdalene College: College Visiting Fellowships; tenure:
one term during the 2025–26 academic year; closing date:
30 January 2025 at 12 noon; further details:
https://www.magd.cam.ac.uk/about/vacancies/academic




                            © 2024 The Chancellor, Masters, and Scholars of the University of Cambridge.
 All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any
            means, without the prior permission in writing of the University of Cambridge, or as expressly permitted by law.
      The University is the owner or the licensee of all intellectual property rights in the site and in the material published on it.
             Those works are protected by copyright laws and treaties around the world. All such rights are reserved.
  Material prepared for the primary purpose of providing information about the University of Cambridge, its teaching and research
    activities, its subsidiary companies and organisations with which it is associated or affiliated has been placed on the site by
                                               the University (‘University Material’).
  Subject to statutory allowances, extracts of University Material may be accessed, downloaded, and printed for your personal and
  non‑commercial use and you may draw the attention of others within your organization to University Material posted on the site.
