Belfast university to investigate work co-authored by academic in plagiarism row

[Prof Arday is smiling. He's wearing a black top and has earrings in. A
backdrop with an ombre of colours is behind him. ]

By

Robbie Meredith[]

Education and arts correspondent, BBC News NI

- Published

  8 August 2026, 00:00 BST

Queen's University Belfast (QUB) is investigating work it published that
was co-authored by Prof Jason Arday, who has resigned from his
University of Cambridge roles following allegations of plagiarism.

The paper, published in 2021, looked at the impact of what was taught in
universities on "Black, Asian and Minority Ethnic (BAME) learners" and
"academics of colour".

Queen's had published a paper on its academic research site co-authored
by Arday and other academics from the university.

Arday is facing accusations of fabricating or exaggerating elements of
his CV. He has defended himself and his work.

In a statement to BBC News NI, a spokesperson for QUB said: "We are
aware that Professor Arday's research, co-authored with academics from
Queen's, is published on our academic research platform.

"We are currently looking into the matter and liaising with other UK
universities in relation to it."

The paper is called "Attempting to break the chain: Reimaging inclusive
pedagogy and decolonising the curriculum within the academy".

"The centrality of whiteness as an instrument of power and privilege
ensures that particular types of knowledge continue to remain omitted
from our curriculums," the work said.

Part of the work was based on interviews with students and staff, who
are quoted.

"When you think about our curriculum it is actually very white and in
many respects quite exclusionary," one female student, described as
"mixed-heritage," said.

"Talking about race and racism… and decolonising the curriculum is
really difficult… especially in a classroom space," a black male student
said.

The paper recommended changing the curriculum in universities to make it
more inclusive and less "Eurocentric".

University of Cambridge

Separately, a group of academics has called for an independent
investigation into the appointment of Arday at the University of
Cambridge.

Several universities at which Arday claimed on his CV to have had
academic roles have since denied him having those roles.

He has admitted errors in his work but denied plagiarism, saying his
autism and a lack of adequate supervision early in his academic career
may have contributed to those mistakes.

He also denied lying about his achievements.

In 2023, then aged 37, Arday became the youngest ever black professor at
Cambridge, telling the BBC at the time his work focused on
neurodivergence and race in education.

Related topics

- Northern Ireland
- Belfast
- Queen's University Belfast
- NI education
- University of Cambridge

More on this story

-
  Cambridge to review process for hiring senior academics after Jason
  Arday resignation

  - Published

    18 hours ago

  [Professor Jason Arday]

-
  Cambridge professor at centre of plagiarism row defends his work

  - Published

    6 days ago

  [Head shot showing Professor Jason Arday sitting in the Sunday with
  Laura Kuennsberg studio. He is smiling at the camera with long black
  locs, wearing a white shirt with a grey waist coat.]
