The British Association for the Advancement of Science
                       Trading as
         The British Science Association (BSA)




               Trustees’ Annual Report
             1 April 2023 to 31 March 2024




                                    Charity registration number: 212479
                         Scotland charity registration number: SC039236




                                                                     1
Chair’s foreword

I am delighted to be introducing the 2023/2024 annual report
and am pleased to report a wonderfully successful and stable
year, despite the turbulence in our external environment.
Across the political spectrum we have seen an increasing
emphasis on the role of science and innovation in national life
making our work more relevant than ever.

As I reflect on the last year, I am once again struck by the
breadth and depth of our charity’s work. The British Science Association (BSA) is a national
charity that wants everyone to feel included in science, so we work with a diverse range of
sectors and stakeholders to deliver our programmes. We bring people and science together
in ways that will have a lasting, positive impact on communities, research and society.

In 2023/24, we began development of our next business plan for 2024-2027, building on the
success of our current strategy and to further align our programmes with our strategic goals.
We have also seen a great level of success throughout the year, and I would particularly like
to highlight the following achievements:

   •   In February 2024, we launched our first BSA manifesto ahead of the 2024 UK
       General Election, calling on all political parties to commit to a fairer and more
       prosperous future through science.
   •   Hosted by the University of Exeter from 7–10 September 2023, the British Science
       Festival was a huge success, with 116 events taking place over four days across the
       university campus and city centre, reaching over 7,500 people.
   •   British Science Week celebrated its 30th anniversary in March 2024 under the theme
       of “Time”. We were thrilled with the level of schools engagement this year with an
       estimated 2.6 million young people getting involved.
   •   We received over 45,000 submissions for CREST Awards from schools this year,
       including over 21,000 Awards for young people from schools in challenging
       circumstances.
   •   Two new Future Forum reports were published in 2023-2024, giving young people
       aged-14-18 a chance to have their voices heard on issues involving science.

More details of these and other activities are in the report. I would like to thank all of the
many funders whose support makes our work possible – in particular, UK Research &
Innovation and Wellcome whose generous support across our programme portfolio enables
our work to grow.

I would also like to thank our departing trustees, Kalli Bowyer (Treasurer) and Stephen
Nuttall (Deputy Chair & Vice-President for Engagement), for their commitment to the
organisation over the last few years. And I welcome Neil Greenwood as our new Treasurer
and Matt Howard as our new Vice-President for Engagement. I would also like to extend my
gratitude to our President for the year, Professor Dame Jane Francis for her active support.

On the Executive, I pay tribute to our departing Director of External Relations, Amy
MacLaren, who left in February 2024 after almost 10 years with us, and to welcome our new
Director of Development and External Relations, Vijay Jassal. The breadth of our delivery
brings along with it challenges which the executive team manages with impressive resilience
and fortitude.

                                                                                                 2
As we look ahead to 2024/25, the BSA will begin the delivery of our new business plan and
five strategic goals, offering more opportunities for us to refine our programmes to suit the
needs of our stakeholders and audiences. We move into the new financial year with stable
finances, a high performing staff team, an experienced and knowledgeable Council, and a
clear sense of our purpose and direction. I would like to thank the team and Council for their
support and energy in creating our new business plan and I look forward to working with
them in the coming year.



Hilary Newiss



Chair of Council




                                                                                             3
Overview of the BSA
Founded in 1831, the British Science Association is a registered charity that works
with partners across the UK to bring people and science together.

We improve young peoples’ experiences of science in their education
We work with community groups and grassroots organisations to give them opportunities to
be involved with science.
We showcase the amazing work of researchers and academics through our events and
activities.
We advocate for a more inclusive science community.

Our vision
A future where science is more relevant, representative and connected to society.

Our mission
The BSA believes that all of society should be included in science.
We bring people and science together in ways that will have a lasting, positive impact on
communities, research and society.
Our goals put our audiences at the heart of what we do – we will be led by their needs first.




                                                                                                4
Section One: Objectives and Achievements
Our ten-year objectives are:

A) For more people, especially those from currently underrepresented groups, to feel that
science is relevant to their lives
    • Provide engagement activities that effectively reach and engage underserved
       audiences with science and use these activities to understand and disseminate
       good practice.
    • Enrich young people’s experience of science in a way that encourages more of them
       to see science as relevant to their lives and to study/work in science.
    • Partner with communities to enable them to conduct, influence or apply
       science/research e.g. involvement in discussions about emerging technologies,
       decisions on research funding priorities, citizen science.

B) For more people, especially those from currently underrepresented groups, to play a
bigger role, have a more powerful voice, and build stronger relationships in/with the STEM
sector
    • Amplify the ‘missing voices’ in science to champion those whose voices are often
        overlooked in science-based conversations.
    • Set up participatory structures to facilitate dialogue, foster mutual understanding
        and transfer power between communities and science/research professionals.
    • Enable collaboration and dialogue to improve the way science is applied and used
        among business, policy and third sectors.

C) Build the capacity of the BSA and the science community to:
   • Understand and address structural inequalities in accessing science education,
       employment and engagement opportunities.
   • Advocate for the adoption of a more participatory and transformative form of science
       engagement.
   • Improve the BSA’s and science community’s diversity and inclusivity in order to
       represent all of society.

Objective C was broadened from its original version in March 2023, reflecting the BSA’s
work to support EDI across the wider science community as well as within the
science/research engagement sector1.

These objectives are supported by a three-year business plan. April 2023 to March 2024 sat
within our business plan covering the period April 2021 to March 2024.

The following pages provide an overview of the key achievements for our main projects and
programmes under each of our three strategic objectives, for the period April 2023 to March
2024.




1 Previous wording for Objective C:

To build the capacity of the BSA and the science/research engagement sector to:
    •     Understand and address structural inequalities in science engagement.
    •     Advocate for the adoption of a more participatory and transformative form of science engagement.
    •     Improve the BSA’s/sector’s diversity and inclusivity.

                                                                                                             5
Strategic objective A
For more people, especially those from currently underrepresented
groups, to feel that science is relevant to their lives

British Science Festival
An annual celebration of the people, stories and ideas at the heart of science, hosted by a
different city each September.

Hosted by the University of Exeter from 07 – 10 September, the 2023 British Science
Festival was a huge success, with 116 events taking place over four days across the
university campus and city centre, reaching over 7,500 people. Our principal partner for the
event was the Natural Environment Research Council, with other key partners including
Exeter Science Centre (who supported 11 community grant events), Exeter Science Park
and the Guildhall shopping centre, which hosted our first late night British Science Festival
takeover event.

The next British Science Festival will be hosted by the University of East London from 11-15
September 2024.

British Science Week
An annual grassroots celebration of science with events and activities taking place in
schools, local community groups and national cultural institutions across the UK. As well as
free resources (schools’ activity packs, marketing resources) and opportunities for the public
to engage in the Week, we provide ‘micro grants’ to schools and community groups to
enable them to participate.

British Science Week (BSW) celebrated its 30th anniversary with the theme ‘Time’. Core-
funded by UKRI, with support across many of the partners listed on pages 11-12, highlights
from this year’s event included:
 - 1,835 schools registering for the Live Assembly hosted by the Royal Observatory
     Greenwich,
 - 115,135 entries to this year’s poster competition
 - Over 60,000 downloads of the British Science Week activity packs
 - 94 Community Grant-funded events, attracting an estimated audience of over 6,000
     people
 - 178 Kickstart grants awarded to schools in challenging circumstances, reaching over
     52,000 young people
 - A webinar on Nature’s Calendar in partnership with the Woodland Trust
 - Nine new Smashing Stereotypes profiles, with support from L’Oreal, Urenco and 3M.

CREST Awards
The BSA’s flagship education programme, which inspires young people to think and behave
like scientists and engineers. CREST recognises young people’s achievement in STEM
project work and is available at a range of levels to suit students aged 3 to 19.

2023/24 highlights included:
- 45,000 submissions from schools, including over 21,000 awards for students from
   schools in challenging circumstances. 2




2
  Classified as those with >30% of young people on free school meals or equivalent, >30% of young people
from minority ethnic backgrounds or a designated rural postcode.
                                                                                                           6
-   Our Engage Network (previously the Under-represented Audiences Network) – grew to
    over 2,000 teachers, providing grants and wider support for schools in challenging
    circumstances.
-   The launch of our first early years CREST resource, ‘Earth and Beyond’ (for 3-5 year
    olds).
-   91 grants awarded to schools in challenging circumstances to support them to
    undertake CREST Awards. 22 grant recipients have also been enrolled in our Engage
    Buddies programme. New to CREST, these teachers are offered additional support and
    encouragement from another peer ‘buddy’ in the network.
-   Teacher focus groups and a workshop with stakeholders across the STEM education
    sector to share ideas and best practice on approaches that help to engage young
    people typically under-represented in STEM.
-   119 kit boxes for primary schools in challenging circumstances – these continue to be
    well received and heavily over-subscribed.

We continue to be grateful to our funding partners for this important work. In addition to our
core funders, UKRI, CREST funders this year included Mewburn Ellis, the NCR Foundation,
DeepMind, Ogden Trust and Royal Commission for the Exhibition of 1851, as well as the
Welsh Government, whose support allows schools in Wales to access CREST free of
charge. We continue to be grateful for the support of our Regional CREST Support
Organisations, who work with schools across the UK.


Strategic Objective B
For more people, especially those from currently underrepresented
groups, to play a bigger role, have a more powerful voice, and build
stronger relationships in/with the STEM sector

Community Engagement Programmes

The British Science Association is committed to supporting community organisations who
work with groups underserved and under-represented in science. Since 2015, the BSA has
supported communities to feel more involved with science. We run a range of programmes
providing communities with an opportunity to engage with science, have a voice in science
and explore science-related issues in a way that is relevant to them.

Community Engagement Network, Leaders and Buddies
Our Community Engagement Network aims to support, connect and inspire community
organisations interested in providing science content to their audiences/users. We work with
over 1,100 community groups as part of the network, enabling us to reach a diverse range of
audiences across the UK.

Our Community Leaders and Buddies programmes harness the passion and ideas of
individuals who work with underserved audiences, enhance their skills to enable them to
become leaders in science engagement in their communities and support them to access
local researchers who they can work together with in their engagement activities.

12 individuals took part in this year’s Community Leaders programme, with a further 12
community leaders taking part in this year’s Community Buddies programme. These leaders
have been paired with researchers from their local areas, with a view to co-developing grant
funded projects which benefit the local community.

Highlands and Islands COP 26 Grant Programme
The Highlands and Islands Climate Change Community Grant scheme, funded by UKRI and
delivered by the BSA and Science Ceilidh, supports community groups in the Highlands and

                                                                                             7
Islands of Scotland to work with a researcher and run a project on a local climate change
issue that matters to them.

Following the success of the first round of our Highlands and Islands climate change
community grants, UKRI funded a second phase for this programme in 2023-2024, enabling
us to support six new community-researcher partnerships through our New Voices Grants,
while also continuing to work with the phase one community-researcher partnerships to help
drive their projects even further through Building Capacity Grants.

Community-led research pilot programme
Exploring an approach to more equitable, community-driven research.
This UKRI-funded project, in partnership with the University of Reading, is now well
underway, with six community groups and researchers working together to deliver projects in
Reading and Slough. In each case the research questions have been led by the community
groups, with examples including the impact of environmental activities and engagement with
the natural environment (beekeeping) on young people's mental health; how sound,
ambience and (eco)acoustics can affect the well-being and mental health of a community
and the impact of black hair product chemicals on health, emotional wellbeing and cultural
identity.

The Ideas Fund
The Ideas Fund launched in January 2021 with the aim of enabling the UK public to develop
and try out ideas that address problems related to mental wellbeing, by working in
partnership with researchers. Supported by Wellcome, the Fund has offered an exciting
opportunity to test out a different approach, of community-led collaboration with researchers,
with individuals, community groups and charities being invited to apply for and hold the
funds, and supported to build relationships with researchers on their own terms.

Delivery of the Ideas Fund continued to progress well in 2023-2024, with the award of 14
extensions to projects originally supported through the previous two open rounds of funding
in 2021/22 and 2022/23.. Recognising that the individual Ideas Fund projects themselves are
not set up to address the systemic issues that prevent this way of working from being more
common, we have now also awarded 'infrastructure grants' in each of the four geographic
areas for the programme. These experimental grants will take a collaborative approach that
seeks to embed change in practice locally.

We also launched an 'insights report' as a key learning output which will form the basis of
future influencing work.

We were delighted to secure Transition and Legacy funding from Wellcome to support the
programme through to October 2027. This additional funding will see us focus on three key
strands of work - continuing to support and embed practice in the four Ideas Fund areas,
building the evidence base on community-led approaches to research / researcher
collaborations, and continuing to develop the BSA's role and partnerships.

For Thought
A thought leadership programme which gives leaders from business, policy, science and civil
society a platform for cross-sector discussion and collaboration around the role of science in
solving the greatest challenges of the day, and how science can better work alongside other
sectors.

This year’s For Thought took place in November 2023, bringing together senior leaders in
business, policy, science and civil society to explore 'Science, innovation, and national
priorities: Deciding the future of education, health, and food'.



                                                                                              8
Also under For Thought banner, we partnered with Google DeepMind on a roundtable event
and short report on the current landscape and future potential of artificial intelligence (AI) in
science.

Future Forum
Empowering young people to share their views on cutting-edge innovations that will affect
their futures.

Two new Future Forum reports were published in 2023-2024, giving young people aged-14-
18 a chance to have their voices heard on issues involving science: Climate change
education (in partnership with the University of Plymouth) was published in June and
accompanied by a launch event in Parliament, while Nuclear Energy (in partnership with
Urenco), was published in early December. Both reports have been well received by funders
and more widely.

With support from the James Weir Foundation and 3M, we also collated data from our
Future Forums over the past four years, providing a dataset of over 8,000 young people that
offers valuable new insights into trends in views on science, society and their future.

Strategic Objective C
To build the capacity of the BSA and the science/research engagement
sector around issues relating to equality, diversity & inclusion (EDI).
Stakeholder influencing and policy

Statements and Consultations
In February 2024 we launched our manifesto ahead of the 2024 UK general election, calling
on all political parties to commit to a fairer and more prosperous future through science. The
manifesto sets out clear asks around EDI in STEM, science education and science and
society.

We also responded to a number of news events and consultations through the year,
including issuing statements in response to the House of Commons Science & Technology
Select Committee’s inquiry into Diversity in STEM, the House of Lords report calling for
urgent changes to education for 11-to-16 year olds and the Horizon Europe announcement
in September 2023.

The APPG for Diversity & Inclusion in STEM
The All-Party Parliamentary Group (APPG) on Diversity & Inclusion (D&I) in STEM aims to
promote inclusion and progression of people from diverse backgrounds in STEM, and to
encourage government, parliamentarians, academics, businesses, and other stakeholders to
work towards a STEM sector that is representative of the population. The Group is funded by
a wide range of sponsors. The BSA has provided the Secretariat for the Group since its
inception in 2018/19.

In July 2023 we published a new APPG report examining the variation in STEM skills
provision across the UK and how this intersects with regional inequity. The group also held
several meetings through the year, including panel discussions on place-based barriers to
gaining STEM skills and D&I and critical technologies.

Also relating to diversity & inclusion in STEM but separate to the APPG, in March 2024 we
hosted a panel event on diversity and inclusion in the life sciences, Chaired by Chi Onwurah
MP at the Centre for Life in Newcastle.



                                                                                                9
Sciencewise
Sciencewise is a public dialogue programme providing insights into what people think about
science & emerging technology. BSA works as part of the Sciencewise consortium
(alongside Involve and NCCPE, funded by UKRI).

2023/24 saw the publication of two new Sciencewise reports:
-   People, communities and climate technology – including an analysis of available
    research on public behaviour change relating to climate change, alongside several
    climate and energy technologies including smart grids, fusion, and carbon dioxide
    removal via direct air capture.
-   And the first of two reports exploring public perceptions of engineering biology, one
    focusing on health and the other (published in April 2024) on food.
In February 2024 we held a roundtable event celebrating 20 years of Sciencewise, chaired
by Professor Dame Ottoline Leyser.

Building the capacity of the Science Engagement sector

UK Science Festivals Network
Core funded by UKRI, the BSA manages and chairs the UK Science Festivals Network
(UKSFN), including science festivals and other festivals featuring science content. The
Network aims to unite, celebrate and grow the science festivals sector in the UK.

The UKSFN currently includes 35 member festivals, including new festivals in Ullapool and
Inverness who joined the network for the first time this year.

Highlights for 2023/24 included:
- The UKSFN Annual Conference in January 2024, hosted at STEAMHouse in
    Birmingham, with over 60 attendees taking part in sessions on community engagement,
    inclusion and disability, sustainability, evaluation, artificial intelligence and working with
    volunteers.
- Eight Making Connections grants supporting festivals to act as brokers between
    community groups and researchers, leading to over 30 new partnerships between
    festivals, community groups and researchers and over 500 participants taking part in
    projects.
- The Compass installation developed for the 2022 British Science Festival was hosted at
    Northern Ireland Science Festival, Humber Science Festival and at Jodrell Bank.

People and culture

Between 01 April 2023 and 31 March 2024 the BSA had 12 new starters and 13 leavers
(compared to 01 April 2022 – 31 March 2023: 11 starters and 7 leavers). This included the
departure of the Director of External Relations, Amy MacLaren, with our new Director of
Development and External Relations, Vijay Jassal, joining in February 2024. The increased
focus on fundraising and business development as part of this role reflects our ambitious
goals as part of the new three year business plan published in April 2024.

Equity, diversity and inclusion (EDI)

The BSA believes that, for too long, science has been the preserve of professional
scientists. We believe science should be open to everyone, regardless of background or
experience.



                                                                                                10
We know there are persistent structural barriers to equality in many areas of UK society,
culture and work, and we believe that transforming the diversity and inclusivity of science
can play a part in tackling them.

We have continued to ensure that a focus on equality, diversity and inclusion sits right at the
heart of our programmes and to look at ways to ensure this focus is also reflected through
our internal systems and processes. We monitor staff views on our EDI work as an
organisation (as reported by staff in our annual staff survey, see, for example, graphs
below). We also have an EDI action plan which is reviewed quarterly and reported to Council
annually.


Diversity data
The BSA has been monitoring staff EDI data since 2017 and trustee EDI data since 2019.
We published this for the first time in 2020 and believe this is an important indication of our
commitment to EDI. Our most recent data, from our survey in Autumn 2023 can be found at
www.britishscienceassociation.org/diversity-data



Section Two: Our future plans
In April 2024, we launched our new three-year business plan , covering the period April 2024
to March 2027.

This sets out the following five goals for the next three years, as we head towards the next
phase of our 10-year strategy:

   1) Transform science education for all young people – By 2027, the BSA wants the
      science curriculum to be more relevant to young people and to offer more
      opportunities for them to take the lead on science projects and practical
      investigations as part of their education. We will also champion and showcase a
      wider range of diverse role models in science.

   2) Put communities at the heart of research and innovation – By 2027, the BSA will
      have led a sector-wide shift that places communities and researchers on equal
      ground in their interactions together. We will develop an evidence-based model for
      change, rooted in lived experience, for funders, partners, and other leaders in the
      sector to use.

   3) Give the public a voice on science decisions – By 2027, the BSA will have
      influenced a change in how decisions about science are made. Seldom heard
      communities, including young people, will be given greater opportunity to have their
      say on topics that affect their lives and livelihoods.

   4) Drive towards a more representative science community – By 2027, the BSA will
      have worked alongside Government to establish a greater commitment to improving
      the equity, diversity and inclusion of science, technology and engineering.

   5) Champion the role of science festivals – By 2027, the BSA wants festivals to be
      recognised as an essential contributor to their communities, through the relationships
      they build between science, local partners and audiences.

In order to support the delivery of these goals, we will also be prioritising the following cross-
cutting themes and enablers:


                                                                                                11
-   Raising the BSA’s organisational profile and influence across education, EDI in
    STEM and science and society
-   Growing the reach and impact of our programmes, including building new
    partnerships and enabling and sharing best practice, both within and outside the BSA
-   Increasing beneficiary voice – ensuring the voice and needs of our beneficiaries
    informs and is highlighted within our work
-   Embedding equity, diversity and inclusion throughout our activities
-   Financial diversity and sustainability – ensuring we have the breadth and level of
    resources to support our aspirations
-   Effective information technology, with the right systems and processes to support
    delivery of our strategic plan
-   Continuing to build the skills and capacity of the team and ensure a welcoming,
    diverse and inclusive culture, reflecting our values and the wider focus of our work.
-   Continued strong governance to provide the support and challenge needed to deliver
    our strategy.



Section Three: Financial Review

Funders/ sponsors:

3M
ACS
Applied Microbiology International (AMI)
Alfresco Learning
Association of Reproductive and Clinical Scientists
AstraZeneca
Atos
British Society for Haematology
British Society for Immunology
Center for Industry Education Collaboration
Collective Act
Collins
Crossland Tankers
De Montfort University
Drax
Dream Machine
ESERO UK
Evolution Education Trust (EET)
Everyday Plastic
Explorify
Futurecodersse Community Interest Company
Gatsby Charitable Foundation
Greenpeace
Harper Collins
The Worshipful Company of Horners
Institution of Engineering and Technology (IET)
The Institute for Research in Schools (IRIS)
James Weir Foundation
King's College London
Leeds Museums & Galleries
LessonUp
                                                                                        12
    National Education Nature Park and Climate Action Awards
    MSD
    National Farmers' Union (NFU)
    National Society for Education in Art & Design
    Nutrition Society
    OKIDO
    PerkinElmer
    Physiological Society
    Primary Science Teaching Trust
    PWIS
    Royal Academy of Engineering
    Royal Observatory Greenwich
    Royal Society of Chemistry
    Salters' Institute
    Sciencewise
    Silence Therapeutics
    Simple Politics
    STEM Learning
    Stemettes Limited
    Sustrans
    UK Antarctic Heritage Trust (UKAHT)
    UK Centre for Ecology & Hydrology (UKCEH)
    UK Research & Innovation (UKRI)
    University of Exeter
    University of Plymouth
    University of Reading
    University of the West of England
    Urenco
    VICTA
    Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics
    Wellcome Trust
    Welsh Government
    World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF)
    Zinc ( on behalf of HS2)


Risk Management
The purpose of the BSA’s Risk & Issue Register is to enable the British Science
Association’s Trustees to identify the main risks and issues the charity faces and record how
to deal with them. The information in this framework is reviewed quarterly by the Senior
Management Team, Finance Director, Finance Committee (financial risks and issues), and
at least twice-yearly by the Audit & Risks Committee. Principal risks and issues (those
identified as ones that would have a significant impact on ability to deliver our charitable
objectives) are reported by default at each Council meeting, alongside other risks and issues
where ratings have changed significantly since the last meeting.

Each section of the register is divided into five areas based on Charity Commission guidance
(CC26 3):


3
 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/charities-and-risk-management-cc26/charities-and-risk-management-
cc26#annex-1-risk-register-template-with-examples-of-use
                                                                                                                13
   1.   Strategic risks and issues
   2.   Operational risks and issues
   3.   Financial risks and issues
   4.   Governance risks and issues
   5.   Compliance and legislative risks and issues


Principal risks identified for the organisation include:
    • Programmes being ineffective or not being aligned to strategy. This is mitigated
        by our strategy, mission, vision and aims being developed and prominently shared
        on our communications channels, regular review of programmes and strategy by
        Council and active consideration of the extent to which potential new programmes
        meet our strategic needs.
    • Loss of funding through competition, threat of recession or change in funding
        model/strategic direction of major funders. This is mitigated by working closely
        with funding partners to understand and adapt to changes in funding models, regular
        analysis to identify competitors and (more often) potential partners, focus on
        capturing our impact, and regular review of the funding landscape to identify
        prospective new funders aligned to our strategic objectives.
    • Team capacity not being sufficient to deliver programmes. This is mitigated by
        using a thorough process for allocating staff time and resources, effective record-
        keeping and handovers and using interim appointments, freelance staff and
        agencies to help address gaps.

Reserves policy

At their meeting in September 2023, Council approved a revised, risk-based reserves policy,
proposed by the Finance Committee. Reserves are based on the following key principles:

   1. Working capital provision - £500k to 800k
   2. Loss or delay in funding - £775k
   3. Wind down costs - £300k - £500k

On this basis, the BSA opted to continue to aim for reserves between £1.6m and £2.1m.
The reserves policy is reviewed annually by the Finance Committee to confirm the
calculations and agree the policy for the coming year.
The Trustees recognise that the current reserves are £1.79m and will continue to aim to
work towards holding unrestricted reserves within the above range in the coming years.
The BSA’s Trustees are satisfied that there are no concerns about the BSA’s existence as a
going concern for at least the next 12 months and will continue to investigate opportunities to
increase unrestricted funding.




                                                                                             14
Section Four: Structure, Governance and Management
The Trustees confirm they have had regard to the guidance issued by the Charity
Commission on public benefit.

Charter, statutes and rules
The British Association for the Advancement of Science was founded in 1831 and is
incorporated by Royal Charter. The Charter is dated 21 April 1928 and there have been
Supplemental Charters dated 15 August 1960, 10 February 1997. The Association’s
Statutes were revised and approved by the Privy Council in May 2006. In April 2020, the
Privy Council approved an updated version of the BSA’s Charter and Statutes.

Council has approved Rules which are reviewed regularly by Council and may be altered by
a majority vote in Council.

Registered and operating names
The British Science Association is the operating name for (and a registered trademark of)
the British Association for the Advancement of Science. The registered name of the charity
remains as the British Association for the Advancement of Science.

Council
The governing body of the British Science Association is Council. Members of Council
comprise the following people who are entitled to vote at Council meetings:
   • The Chair
   • The Vice (deputy) Chair
   • The Treasurer
   • Up to three Vice-Presidents who advise on specific matters
   • Up to eight people appointed as determined by Council

In addition, the President, President-elect and immediate Past President, if not Trustees, are
entitled to attend Council but not to vote.

Council normally meets four times a year, once per quarter. Its function is to agree a vision
and strategy for the charity and to direct all the affairs and business of the organisation.
Council may delegate its powers to the staff or its sub committees.

Members of Council normally serve for a period of three years with the option of being
reappointed for a further three years as long as any continuous period in office does not
normally exceed six years. In exceptional circumstances, by two thirds majority vote in
Council of all members present, a further year’s extension is permitted.

Trustee induction and training
Following their election or appointment, induction information is sent to all new Trustees
before they attend their first Council meeting. This comprises relevant Association and
Charity Commission documents and information including the Charity Governance Code.
External training opportunities for new and existing Trustees are offered in addition to away

                                                                                                15
days and ad hoc meetings. Council members are invited to many of the Association’s
external events.

Finance Committee (incorporating the Investment Committee)
Finance Committee is chaired by the Treasurer and comprises between four and six Council
members, plus the Chief Executive as voting members, with the Finance Director also
attending meetings as a non-voting member. Meetings are held four times per year. The
purpose of the Committee is to assist Council in supervising the broad direction of the
Association’s financial affairs at a strategic level, providing a forum for more detailed
consideration of the financial strategy and financial risk, acting as a sounding board for
discussion with management and for the supervision and control of the Association’s
investments.

Audit & Risks Committee
The Audit & Risks Committee comprises three members of Council, including the Treasurer.
Council is able to co-opt further persons if needed to provide additional expertise or an
external perspective, provided they do not outnumber the Council appointees. The
Committee meets at least twice a year and meetings are attended by the Finance Director
and Chief Executive.

Council has appointed a professional auditor of the Association, who is qualified for
appointment as auditor of a company in accordance with the provisions of the Charities Act.
The auditor attends meetings of the Committee as and when required.

Council Members
Council member roles and terms of office
                                                     Elected
Name              Role                                                  Retiring
                                                     /appointed
Hilary Newiss    Chair                               March 2022         March 2025 (1)


Stephen
                 Deputy Chair and VP Engagement July 2017               March 2024
Nuttall


Kalli Bowyer     Treasurer                           June 2018          March 2024

Neil Greenwood Treasurer                             March 2024         April 2027 (1)
Heather King     VP Education                        Oct 2021           Nov 2024 (1)
Sarah Chaytor    VP Policy, Partnerships & Impact    Mar 2023           April 2026 (1)
Matthew
                 VP Engagement                       March 2024         April 2027 (1)
Howard

Sarah Main       Trustee (elected)                   Oct 2017           Nov 2023

Joe de Sousa Trustee (appointed)                     Aug 2020           Sept 2026 (2)
Rubina Ahmed Trustee (appointed)                     Aug 2020           Sept 2026 (2)
Kate Mingay  Trustee (appointed)                     Aug 2020           December 2023

Kevin Coutinho Trustee (appointed) - EDI lead        Mar 2023           April 2026 (1)


                                                                                          16
                   Trustee (appointed) - Community
Phil Smith                                                    Mar 2023              April 2026 (1)
                   engagement lead
   (1) Indicates the end of the first term of office
   (2) Indicates the end of the second term of office (where Council members have been reappointed at the
       end of the first term).




Council membership of sub-committees

                                                                                         Honorary
                             Finance           Audit & Risk       Nominations
 Name                                                                                    Fellowships
                             Committee         Committee          Committee
                                                                                         Committee
  Hilary Newiss                Y                      Y               Y (Chair)             Y (Chair)
  Kate Mingay*                 Y                      Y
  Stephen Nuttall**           Y                       Y
  Kalli Bowyer**              Y                       Y
  Sarah Main****               Y
  Rubina Ahmed                                                             Y
  Joe de Sousa                                        Y                    Y
  Heather King                                                             Y                     Y
  Sarah Chaytor                                                                                  Y
  Kevin Coutinho                                                           Y                     Y
  Phil Smith                  Y
  Neil Greenwood***        Y (Chair)              Y (Chair)
  Matthew Howard***            Y
* stepped down December 2023
** stepped down March 2024
*** term started March 2024
**** stepped down November 2023

President
September 2022 to August 2023 – Dr Anne-Marie Imafidon (moving to Immediate Past
President from September 2023 to August 2024)

September 2023 to August 2024 – Professor Dame Jane Francis

2023 Honorary Fellows
Professor Jason Arday, Professor of Sociology of Education at the University of Cambridge

Dr Jess Wade, Lecturer and Research Fellow in the Faculty of Engineering, Imperial College
London.

Royal Patron
Following the death of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II in September 2022, for the 2023-
2024 year we did not have a Royal Patron.




                                                                                                            17
Section Five: Reference and Administrative details
Senior Staff

Hannah Russell       Chief Executive
Gill Riches          Director of Programmes
Amy MacLaren         Director of External Relations (until 13 February 2024)
Vijay Jassal         Director of Development & External Relations (from 06 February
                     2024)
Dave Lloyd           Director of Finance (outsourced)

Advisors

Bankers              NatWest Bank plc, 208 Piccadilly, London, W1A 2DG
Solicitors           Veale Wasbrough Vizards LLP, 45 Clarendon Road, Watford, WD17
                     1SZ
Accounting           TC Kent (formerly Crossley Group), Star House, Star Hill, Rochester,
                     ME1 1UX
Independent auditors Sayer Vincent, 110 Golden Lane, London, EC1Y
                      0TG
Investment advisors James Hambro Partners LLP, 45 Pall Mall, London, SW1Y 5JG

Principal and registered office

Wellcome Wolfson Building 165 Queen’s Gate London SW7 5HD

Declarations

The Trustees declare that they have approved the Trustees’ report above.




Signed on behalf of the BSA’s Council




Name:          Hilary Newiss
Position:      Chair
Date:          02 October 2024




                                                                                        18
Independent Auditor’s report to the members of The British Association for the

Advancement of Science



Opinion
We have audited the financial statements of The British Association for the Advancement of
Science (the ‘charity’) for the year ended 31 March 2024 which comprise the statement of financial
activities, balance sheet, statement of cash flows and notes to the financial statements, including
significant accounting policies. The financial reporting framework that has been applied in their
preparation is applicable law and United Kingdom Accounting Standards, including FRS 102 The
Financial Reporting Standard applicable in the UK and Republic of Ireland (United Kingdom
Generally Accepted Accounting Practice).


In our opinion, the financial statements:
●     Give a true and fair view of the state of the charity’s affairs as at 31 March 2024 and of its
      incoming resources and application of resources, for the year then ended
●     Have been properly prepared in accordance with United Kingdom Generally Accepted
      Accounting Practice
●     Have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Charities Act 2011 and of
      the Charities and Trustee Investment (Scotland) Act 2005 and regulation 8 of the Charities
      Accounts (Scotland) Regulations 2006 (as amended).


Basis for opinion
We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing (UK) (ISAs (UK))
and applicable law. Our responsibilities under those standards are further described in the
Auditor’s responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements section of our report. We are
independent of the charity in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our
audit of the financial statements in the UK, including the FRC’s Ethical Standard and we have
fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements. We believe that
the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our
opinion.


Conclusions relating to going concern
In auditing the financial statements, we have concluded that the trustees' use of the going concern
basis of accounting in the preparation of the financial statements is appropriate.


Based on the work we have performed, we have not identified any material uncertainties relating to
events or conditions that, individually or collectively, may cast significant doubt on The British
Association for the Advancement of Science's ability to continue as a going concern for a period of
at least twelve months from when the financial statements are authorised for issue.


Our responsibilities and the responsibilities of the trustees with respect to going concern are
described in the relevant sections of this report.




                                                                                                     19
Other Information
The other information comprises the information included in the trustees’ annual report, other
than the financial statements and our auditor’s report thereon. The trustees are responsible for
the other information contained within the annual report. Our opinion on the financial statements
does not cover the other information and, except to the extent otherwise explicitly stated in our
report, we do not express any form of assurance conclusion thereon. Our responsibility is to read
the other information and, in doing so, consider whether the other information is materially
inconsistent with the financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the course of the audit or
otherwise appears to be materially misstated. If we identify such material inconsistencies or
apparent material misstatements, we are required to determine whether this gives rise to a
material misstatement in the financial statements themselves. If, based on the work we have
performed, we conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information, we are
required to report that fact.


We have nothing to report in this regard.


Matters on which we are required to report by exception
We have nothing to report in respect of the following matters in relation to which the Charities
(Accounts and Reports) Regulations 2008 and the Charities Accounts (Scotland) Regulations 2006
(as amended) require us to report to you if, in our opinion:
●     The information given in the trustees’ annual report is inconsistent in any material respect
      with the financial statements;
●     Sufficient and proper accounting records have not been kept; or
●     The financial statements are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns; or
●     We have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit


Responsibilities of trustees
As explained more fully in the statement of trustees’ responsibilities set out in the trustees’ annual
report, the trustees are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements and for being
satisfied that they give a true and fair view, and for such internal control as the trustees determine
is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material
misstatement, whether due to fraud or error.


In preparing the financial statements, the trustees are responsible for assessing the charity’s
ability to continue as a going concern, disclosing, as applicable, matters related to going concern
and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the trustees either intend to liquidate the
charity or to cease operations, or have no realistic alternative but to do so.


Auditor’s responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements
We have been appointed as auditor under section 144 of the Charities Act 2011 and section
44(1)(c) of the Charities and Trustee Investment (Scotland) Act 2005 and report in accordance with
regulations made under that Act.




                                                                                                  20
Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a
whole are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and to issue an
auditor’s report that includes our opinion. Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance, but
is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs (UK) will always detect a
material misstatement when it exists. Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are
considered material if, individually or in the aggregate, they could reasonably be expected to
influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.


Irregularities, including fraud, are instances of non-compliance with laws and regulations. We
design procedures in line with our responsibilities, outlined above, to detect material
misstatements in respect of irregularities, including fraud. The extent to which our procedures are
capable of detecting irregularities, including fraud are set out below.


Capability of the audit in detecting irregularities

In identifying and assessing risks of material misstatement in respect of irregularities, including
fraud and non-compliance with laws and regulations, our procedures included the following:
●     We enquired of management and the Finance, Audit and Risk Committee, which included
      obtaining and reviewing supporting documentation, concerning the charity’s policies and
      procedures relating to:
      ● Identifying, evaluating, and complying with laws and regulations and whether they were
         aware of any instances of non-compliance;
      ● Detecting and responding to the risks of fraud and whether they have knowledge of any
         actual, suspected, or alleged fraud;
      ● The internal controls established to mitigate risks related to fraud or non-compliance
         with laws and regulations.
●     We inspected the minutes of meetings of those charged with governance.
●     We obtained an understanding of the legal and regulatory framework that the charity
      operates in, focusing on those laws and regulations that had a material effect on the
      financial statements or that had a fundamental effect on the operations of the charity from
      our professional and sector experience.
●     We communicated applicable laws and regulations throughout the audit team and remained
      alert to any indications of non-compliance throughout the audit.
●     We reviewed any reports made to regulators.
●     We reviewed the financial statement disclosures and tested these to supporting
      documentation to assess compliance with applicable laws and regulations.
●     We performed analytical procedures to identify any unusual or unexpected relationships that
      may indicate risks of material misstatement due to fraud.
●     In addressing the risk of fraud through management override of controls, we tested the
      appropriateness of journal entries and other adjustments, assessed whether the judgements
      made in making accounting estimates are indicative of a potential bias and tested significant
      transactions that are unusual or those outside the normal course of business.


Because of the inherent limitations of an audit, there is a risk that we will not detect all
irregularities, including those leading to a material misstatement in the financial statements or
non-compliance with regulation. This risk increases the more that compliance with a law or
regulation is removed from the events and transactions reflected in the financial statements, as we
will be less likely to become aware of instances of non-compliance. The risk is also greater




                                                                                                 21
regarding irregularities occurring due to fraud rather than error, as fraud involves intentional
concealment, forgery, collusion, omission or misrepresentation.


A further description of our responsibilities is available on the Financial Reporting Council’s
website at: www.frc.org.uk/auditorsresponsibilities. This description forms part of our auditor’s
report.


Use of our report
This report is made solely to the charity's trustees as a body, in accordance with section 44(1)(c) of
the Charities and Trustee Investment (Scotland) Act 2005, section 144 of the Charities Act 2011
and regulations made under section 154 of that Act. Our audit work has been undertaken so that
we might state to the charity's trustees those matters we are required to state to them in an
auditor’s report and for no other purpose. To the fullest extent permitted by law, we do not accept
or assume responsibility to anyone other than the charity and the charity's trustees as a body, for
our audit work, for this report, or for the opinions we have formed.




Judith Miller (Senior statutory auditor)
Date: 18 October 2024
Sayer Vincent LLP, Statutory Auditor
110 Golden Lane, LONDON, EC1Y 0TG


Sayer Vincent LLP is eligible to act as auditor in terms of section 1212 of the Companies Act 2006




                                                                                                   22
British Association for the Advancement of Science

Statement of financial activities

For the year ended 31 March 2024

                                                                                                                                                                2023
                                                                                                         2024                                              (Restated)
                                                           Unrestricted         Restricted               Total      Unrestricted         Restricted             Total
                                                 Note                 £                  £                  £                  £                  £                 £

Income from:
Donations and legacies                            2            175,093                    -          175,093             84,196           104,230            188,427
Charitable activities
    Engagement programmes                         3            109,283         1,566,026           1,675,309             65,700         1,926,316          1,992,016
    Education programmes                          3            216,581         1,017,080           1,233,661            244,922           928,146          1,173,068
    Policy, Partnerships & Impact                 3            149,606                 -             149,606            136,109           144,717            280,826
    Grants Programme                              3                  -         1,504,908           1,504,908                  -         2,775,396          2,775,396
Investments                                       4             34,676                 -              34,676             20,260                 -             20,260

Total income                                                   685,239         4,088,015           4,773,253            551,187         5,878,805         6,429,993

Expenditure on:                                   5
Raising funds                                                  156,750                    -          156,750             79,989           104,230            184,220
Charitable activities
    Engagement programmes                         5            196,642         1,558,726           1,755,368             92,054         1,934,106          2,026,160
    Education programmes                          5             56,689         1,007,127           1,063,816             76,839         1,029,131          1,105,970
    Policy, Partnerships & Impact                 5            310,734                 -             310,734            246,098           144,717            390,814
    Grants Programme                              5                  -         1,503,951           1,503,951                  -         2,762,041          2,762,041
    Regions, branches and sections                5                  -             6,993               6,993                  -             5,649              5,649
Other (Overhead allocation allocated to                              -                 -                   -             15,339                 -             15,339

Total expenditure                                              720,815         4,076,797           4,797,612            510,319         5,979,874         6,490,193

Net (expenditure) / income before net
gains on investments                                           (35,577)            11,218            (24,359)            40,868          (101,068)           (60,200)

Net gains on investments                                        83,755                    -           83,755            (52,415)                  -          (52,415)

Net expenditure for the period/year               7             48,178             11,218             59,396            (11,547)         (101,068)         (112,615)

Transfers between funds                           18            (2,300)             2,300                    -                  -                 -                     -

Net movement in funds                                           45,878             13,518             59,396            (11,547)         (101,068)         (112,615)
Reconciliation of funds:
Total funds brought forward                                  1,822,303            238,049          2,060,352          1,833,850           339,117          2,172,967

Total funds carried forward                       17         1,868,181            251,567          2,119,748          1,822,303           238,049          2,060,352

All of the above results are derived from continuing activities. There were no other recognised gains or losses other than those stated above. Movements in funds are
disclosed in Note 17 to the financial statements.




                                                                                                                                                            23
British Association for the Advancement of Science

Balance sheet

As at 31 March 2024


                                                                                   2024                  2023 (Restated)
                                                     Note                  £          £                               £

Fixed assets:
Tangible assets                                   12                              13,191                         25,654
Investments                                       13                           1,354,527                      1,264,804

                                                                               1,367,718                      1,290,458
Current assets:
Debtors                                           14           1,682,216                    1,754,114
Cash at bank and in hand                                         973,942                    1,650,368

                                                               2,656,158                    3,404,481
Liabilities:
Creditors: amounts falling due within one year    15          (1,904,128)                  (2,634,587)

Net current assets                                                              752,030                        769,894

Total assets less current liabilities                                          2,119,748                      2,060,352

The funds of the charity:                         18
Restricted income funds                                                         251,567                        238,049
Unrestricted income funds:
   Designated funds                                              954,861                    1,031,691
   General funds                                                 913,320                      790,612

Total unrestricted funds                                                       1,868,181                      1,822,303

Total charity funds                                                            2,119,748                      2,060,352

Approved by the trustees on 2 October 2024 and signed on their behalf by




Hilary Newiss                                     Neil Greenwood
Chair of Council                                  General Treasurer




                                                                                                                24
British Association for the Advancement of Science

Statement of cash flows

For the year ended 31 March 2024



                                                                         2024                       2023
                                                           Note
                                                                         £             £            £             £
Cash flows from operating activities                       20

Net cash provided by / (used in) operating activities                           (702,122)                   138,884

Cash flows from investing activities:
Dividends, interest and rents from investments                     34,676                       20,260
Purchase of fixed assets                                           (3,010)                    (13,259)
Proceeds from sale of investments                                 360,218                     366,128
Purchase of investments                                           (395,183)                 (429,981)


Net cash provided by / (used in) investing activities                             (3,299)                   (56,853)



Change in cash and cash equivalents in the period                               (705,421)                    82,032

Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of the period                        1,686,763                  1,604,731



Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the period         21                    981,342                   1,686,763




                                                                                                            25
British Association for the Advancement of Science

Notes to the financial statements

For the year ended 31 March 2024

1    Accounting policies

a) Statutory information
   British Association for the Advancement of Science is an unincorporated charity registered with the Charity Commission in England & Wales and
   Scotland. The registered office address is Wellcome Wolfson Building, 165 Queen’s Gate, London, SW7 5HD.


b) Basis of preparation
   The financial statements have been prepared in accordance with Accounting and Reporting by Charities: Statement of Recommended Practice
   applicable to charities preparing their accounts n accordance with the Financial Reporting Standard applicable in the UK and Republic of Ireland
   (FRS 102) - (Charities SORP FRS 102). The Financial Reporting Standard applicable in the UK and Republic of Ireland (FRS 102) and the Charities
   Act 2011.

     The accounts have been prepared to give a ‘true and fair’ view and have departed from the Charities (Accounts and Reports) Regulations 2008
     only to the extent required to provide a ‘true and fair view’. This departure has involved following Accounting and Reporting by Charities
     preparing their accounts in accordance with the Financial Reporting Standard applicable in the UK and Republic of Ireland (FRS 102) issued on 16
     July 2014 rather than the Accounting and Reporting by Charities: Statement of Recommended Practice effective from 1 April 2005 which has
     since been withdrawn.
     Assets and liabilities are initially recognised at historical cost or transaction value except that investments held as fixed assets are carried at
     market value as at the balance sheet date.
c)   Public benefit entity
     The Association meets the definition of a public benefit entity under FRS 102.

d) Going concern
   The trustees consider that there are no material uncertainties about the Association's ability to continue as a going concern.

     The trustees do not consider that there are any sources of estimation uncertainty at the reporting date that have a significant risk of causing a
     material adjustment to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities within the next reporting period.

e) Income
   Income is recognised when the Association has entitlement to the funds, any performance conditions attached to the income have been met, it is
   probable that the income will be received and that the amount can be measured reliably.


     Income received for general purposes of the Association is credited to unrestricted funds. Income subject to specific wishes of the donor is
     credited to relevant restricted funds.
     Subscription income is taken into the financial statements as a receipt in the year in which the subscription is received.

     Income received in advance of the provision of a specified service is deferred until the criteria for income recognition are met.


     Provision is made in the financial statements for income tax recoverable on gift aid donations.
     Gross income received from the Association's investment portfolio is reinvested with the Association's portfolio fund managers for the
     acquisition of further stocks.

     Interest on funds held on deposit is included when receivable and the amount can be measured reliably by the Association; this is normally upon
     notification of the interest paid or payable by the bank.


f)   Donations of gifts, services and facilities
     Donated professional services and donated facilities are recognised as income when the Association has control over the item or received the
     service, any conditions associated with the donation have been met, the receipt of economic benefit from the use by the Association of the item
     is probable and that economic benefit can be measured reliably. In accordance with the Charities SORP (FRS 102), volunteer time is not
     recognised. The trustees’ annual report sets out more information about their contribution to the work of the Association.

g) Fund accounting
   Restricted funds are to be used for specific purposes as laid down by the donor. Expenditure which meets these criteria is charged to the fund.


     Unrestricted funds are donations and other incoming resources received or generated for charitable purposes.

     Designated funds are unrestricted funds earmarked by the trustees for particular purposes.




                                                                                                                                                    26
British Association for the Advancement of Science

Notes to the financial statements

For the year ended 31 March 2024

1    Accounting policies (continued)

h) Expenditure and irrecoverable VAT
   Expenditure is recognised once there is a legal or constructive obligation to make a payment to a third party, it is probable that settlement will
   be required and the amount of the obligation can be measured reliably. Expenditure is classified under the following activity headings:


         Costs of raising funds relate to the costs incurred by the Association in inducing third parties to make voluntary contributions to it, as well
          as the cost of any activities with a fundraising purpose
         Expenditure on charitable activities includes the costs of delivering services, exhibitions and other educational activities undertaken to
          further the purposes of the Association and their associated support costs
         Other expenditure represents those items not falling into any other heading

     Irrecoverable VAT is charged as a cost against the activity for which the expenditure was incurred.

i)   Grants payable
     Grants payable are made to third parties in furtherance of the charity's objects. Single or multi-year grants are accounted for when either the
     recipient has a reasonable expectation that they will receive a grant and the trustees have agreed to pay the grant without condition, or the
     recipient has a reasonable expectation that they will receive a grant and that any condition attaching to the grant is outside of the control of the
     charity.

j)   Allocation of support costs
     Resources expended are allocated to a particular activity where the cost relates directly to that activity. However, support cost (the cost of overall
     direction and administration of each activity, comprising the salary and overhead costs of the central function) is apportioned on the bases of an
     estimate, based on staff time, of the amount attributable to each activity.

     Governance costs are the costs associated with the governance arrangements of the Association. These costs are associated with constitutional
     and statutory requirements and include any costs associated with the strategic management of the Association’s activities. These costs are
     allocated to each activity based on staff time.

          Cost of Raising Funds:           7%
          Engagement programmes:           40%
          Education programmes:            26%
          Policy, Partnerships & Impact    10%
          New Grants programme             17%

k) Operating leases
   Where assets are financed by leasing agreement that give rights approximating to ownership ("finance leases"), the assets are treated as if they
   had been purchased outright. The amount capitalised is the present value of the minimum lease payments during the lease term. The
   corresponding leasing commitments are shown as obligations to the lessor.

l)   Tangible fixed assets
     Items of equipment are capitalised where the purchase price exceeds £100. Depreciation costs are allocated to activities on the basis of the use
     of the related assets in those activities. Assets are reviewed for impairment if circumstances indicate their carrying value may exceed their net
     realisable value and value in use.
     Depreciation is provided at rates calculated to write down the cost of each asset to its estimated residual value over its expected useful life. The
     depreciation rates in use are as follows:
         Office equipment                                           Straight line over 5 years
         Computer equipment                                         Straight line over 3 years

m) Listed investments
   Investments are a form of basic financial instrument and are initially recognised at their transaction value and subsequently measured at their
   fair value as at the balance sheet date using the closing quoted market price. Any change in fair value will be recognised in the statement of
   financial activities. Investment gains and losses, whether realised or unrealised, are combined and shown in the heading “net gains/(losses) on
   investments” in the statement of financial activities. The Association does not acquire put options, derivatives or other complex financial
   instruments.

     The Association's Investment Fund is invested in accordance with the Powers of Investment set out in the Schedule to the 1977 Supplemental
     Charter, which requires that at least 15% of the fund must comprise investments in Government and/or fixed interest securities, including
     interest-bearing cash deposits. Council has determined that the primary objective of investment policy should be to maintain the capital value of
     the fund in real terms over the long term.

n) Debtors
   Trade and other debtors are recognised at the settlement amount due after any trade discount offered. Prepayments are valued at the amount
   prepaid net of any trade discounts due.




                                                                                                                                                  27
British Association for the Advancement of Science

Notes to the financial statements

For the year ended 31 March 2024

1   Accounting policies (continued)

o) Cash at bank and in hand
   Cash at bank and cash in hand includes cash and short term highly liquid investments with a short maturity of three months or less from the
   date of acquisition or opening of the deposit or similar account. Cash balances exclude any funds held on behalf of service users.

p) Creditors and provisions
   Creditors and provisions are recognised where the Association has a present obligation resulting from a past event that will probably result in
   the transfer of funds to a third party and the amount due to settle the obligation can be measured or estimated reliably. Creditors and
   provisions are normally recognised at their settlement amount after allowing for any trade discounts due.

    The Association only has financial assets and financial liabilities of a kind that qualify as basic financial instruments. Basic financial instruments
    are initially recognised at transaction value and subsequently measured at their settlement value with the exception of bank loans which are
    subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method.

q) Pensions
   The Association operates under an auto enrolment scheme and auto enrols the new employees into the Government's NEST scheme. Pre 1 July
   2014, employees are in an AEGON pension scheme. The Association matches the minimum 1% contribution and pays (on a sliding scale) up to
   two times the contributions made by employees to the schemes which can range between 1% and 5% of gross salary. The pension charge
   recorded in these financial statements is the amount of contributions payable by the Association in the accounting year.


2   Income from donations and legacies
                                                                                                 2024                                                 2023
                                                       Unrestricted        Restricted            Total     Unrestricted        Restricted             Total
                                                                  £                 £               £                 £                 £                £

    Subscriptions and donations                              5,682                  -           5,682             9,353                -            9,353
    Donated services and facilities - office space          72,428                  -          72,428            70,182                -           70,182
    Other income                                            96,983                  -          96,983             4,660          104,230          108,891

                                                           175,093                  -         175,093            84,196          104,230          188,427



3   Income from charitable activities

                                                                                                                                                      2023
                                                                                                 2024                                            (Restated)
                                                       Unrestricted        Restricted            Total     Unrestricted        Restricted             Total
                                                                  £                 £               £                 £                 £                 £

    British Science Festival                                34,000          399,354           433,354                 -        1,056,562        1,056,562
    Other engagement programmes                             75,283        1,166,672         1,241,955            65,700          869,754          935,454

    Sub-total for engagement programmes                    109,283        1,566,026         1,675,309            65,700        1,926,316        1,992,016

    Education programmes                                   216,581        1,017,080         1,233,661          244,922           928,146        1,173,068
    Policy, Partnerships & Impact                          149,606                -           149,606          136,110           144,717          280,826
    Grants Programme                                             -        1,504,908         1,504,908                -         2,775,398        2,775,398

    Total income from charitable activities                475,470        4,088,014         4,563,484          446,732         5,774,576        6,221,308



4   Income from investments

                                                                                                 2024                                                 2023
                                                       Unrestricted        Restricted            Total     Unrestricted        Restricted             Total
                                                                  £                 £               £                 £                 £                £

    Dividends                                               17,239                  -          17,239            15,248                 -           15,248
    Interest                                                17,437                  -          17,437             5,012                 -            5,012

                                                            34,676                  -          34,676            20,260                 -           20,260




                                                                                                                                                  28
British Association for the Advancement of Science

Notes to the financial statements

For the year ended 31 March 2024

5a Analysis of expenditure (current year)

                                                                                  Charitable activities
                                                                                               Policy,        Regions,
                                    Cost of raising   Engagement      Education       Partnerships &      branches and        Grants   Governance                        2024
                                             funds    programmes   programmes                 Impact           sections   Programme          costs   Support costs       Total
                                                  £            £              £                     £                 £            £             £               £          £

   Staff costs (Note 8)                      83,383      506,828      332,839               124,573                  -      213,090        27,990        269,827     1,558,530
   Direct costs                               3,301      890,737      491,209                96,423              8,843    1,137,358             -              -     2,627,871
   Investment managers' fees                      -            -            -                     -                  -            -             -         10,466        10,466
   Office costs                                   -            -            -                     -                  -            -         1,784        280,782       282,566
   Depreciation and disposals                     -            -            -                     -                  -            -             -         15,474        15,474
   Legal and professional                         -            -            -                     -                  -            -             -         24,811        24,811
   Irrecoverable VAT                              -            -            -                     -                  -            -             -        126,917       126,917
   Office service charge                          -            -            -                     -                  -            -             -        123,813       123,813
   Office equipment                               -            -            -                     -                  -            -             -              -             -
   Insurance                                      -            -            -                     -                  -            -             -         14,454        14,454
   Marketing and PR                               -            -            -                     -                  -            -             -         11,860        11,860

                                             86,684    1,397,565      824,048               220,996              8,843    1,350,448        29,774        878,404     4,796,762

   Support costs                             58,097      353,134      231,907                 86,796                 -      148,471             -       (878,404)            ()

   Governance costs                           1,969       11,969         7,860                 2,942                 -        5,032      (29,774)               -

   Total expenditure 2024                   146,750    1,762,668    1,063,815               310,734              8,843    1,503,951             -               -    4,796,762




                                                                                                                                                                        29
British Association for the Advancement of Science

Notes to the financial statements

For the year ended 31 March 2024

5b Analysis of expenditure (previous year)

                                                                                  Charitable activities
                                                                                               Policy,        Regions,
                                    Cost of raising   Engagement      Education       Partnerships &      branches and        Grants   Governance                               2023
                                             funds    programmes   programmes                 Impact           sections   Programme          costs   Support costs   (Restated) Total
                                                  £            £              £                     £                 £            £             £               £                 £

   Staff costs (Note 8)                      86,431      467,487      323,891               153,550                  -      187,940        24,037        233,052          1,476,388
   Direct costs                              30,635    1,195,446      530,421               127,750              5,649    2,443,414             -         48,985          4,382,301
   Investment managers' fees                      -            -            -                     -                  -            -             -         10,310             10,310
   Office costs                                   -            -            -                     -                  -            -             -        250,948            250,948
   Depreciation and disposals                     -            -            -                     -                  -            -             -         13,902             13,902
   Legal and professional                         -            -            -                     -                  -            -             -         23,807             23,807
   Irrecoverable VAT                              -            -            -                     -                  -            -             -        180,607            180,607
   Office service charge                          -            -            -                     -                  -            -             -        131,103            131,103
   Office equipment                               -            -            -                     -                  -            -             -            221                221
   Insurance                                      -            -            -                     -                  -            -             -         11,452             11,452
   Marketing and PR                               -            -            -                     -                  -            -             -          9,156              9,156

                                          117,066      1,662,933      854,312               281,300              5,649    2,631,354        24,037        913,542          6,490,193

   Support costs                             65,433      353,914      245,205               106,706                  -      126,943             -       (898,203)                .00

   Governance costs                           1,722        9,312         6,452                 2,808                 -        3,744      (24,037)               -               (.00)

   Total expenditure 2023                184,220       2,026,160    1,105,970               390,814              5,649    2,762,041             -         15,339          6,490,193




                                                                                                                                                                              30
British Association for the Advancement of Science

Notes to the financial statements

For the year ended 31 March 2024

6     Grant making
                                                                                                                           2023
                                                                                                        2024          (Restated)
                                                                                                           £                   £
      Cost
      Wellcome Trust grants                                                                          845,754         2,097,716
      Engagement Grants                                                                              292,816           151,425
      Education Grants                                                                                87,271           112,750
      PPI Grants                                                                                           -                 -


      At the end of the year                                                                       1,225,842         2,361,891




7     Net income / (expenditure) for the period

      This is stated after charging :


                                                                                                        2024               2023
                                                                                                           £                  £

      Depreciation                                                                                     15,474             13,902
      Operating lease rentals:
         Property                                                                                      51,385             60,920
      Auditors' remuneration (excluding VAT):
         Audit                                                                                         14,450             13,500

8     Analysis of staff costs, trustee remuneration and expenses, and the cost of key management personnel

      Staff costs were as follows:

                                                                                                        2024               2023
                                                                                                           £                  £

      Salaries and wages                                                                           1,357,988         1,275,583
      Social security costs                                                                          138,343           134,811
      Employer’s contribution to defined contribution pension schemes                                 62,199            65,995

                                                                                                   1,558,530         1,476,388



      The following number of employees received employee benefits (excluding employer pension costs) during the period
      between:


                                                                                                        2024               2023
                                                                                                         No.                No.

      £60,000 - £69,999                                                                                      1                 1
      £70,000 - £79,999                                                                                      1                 1
      £90,000 - £99,999                                                                                      -                 -
      > £100,000                                                                                             -                 -


      The total employee benefits including pension contributions of the key management personnel were £236,187.70 (2023:
      £220,430.58).
      The Council members were not paid nor received any other benefits from employment with the Association in the year (2023:
      £nil). No Council member received payment for professional or other services supplied to the Association (2023: £nil).

      Council members' expenses represent the payment or reimbursement of travel and subsistence costs totalling £925 (2023:
      £648) incurred by 4 (2023: 2) members relating to attendance at Council meetings.




                                                                                                                            31
British Association for the Advancement of Science

Notes to the financial statements

For the year ended 31 March 2024

9     Staff numbers



      The average number of employees (head count based on number of staff employed) during the period was as follows:




                                                                                                              2024          2023
                                                                                                               No.           No.

      Fundraising, marketing and public relations                                                               5.7              5.3
      Engagement programmes                                                                                     8.8              9.1
      Educational programmes                                                                                    6.8              7.8
      Policy, Partnerships & Impact                                                                             6.0              5.0
      Ideas Fund                                                                                                3.4              3.0
      Support and Governance                                                                                    6.6              6.1

                                                                                                               37.3             36.2



10    Related party transactions

      There are no related party transactions to disclose for 2024 (2023: none).

      There are no donations from related parties which are outside the normal course of business and no restricted donations
      from related parties.



11    Taxation

      The charity is exempt from corporation tax as all its income is charitable and is applied for charitable purposes.


12    Tangible fixed assets
                                                                                    Fixtures and         Computer
                                                                                         fittings       equipment           Total
                                                                                                £               £              £
      Cost
      At the start of the year                                                           30,211             43,578         73,789
      Additions in year                                                                     365              2,645          3,010

      At the end of the year                                                             30,576             46,223         76,799


      Depreciation
      At the start of the year                                                           28,730             19,404         48,134
      Charge for the year                                                                   693             14,781         15,474

      At the end of the year                                                             29,423             34,185         63,608
      Net book value
      At the end of the year                                                               1,153            12,038         13,191

      At the start of the Year                                                             1,481            24,174         25,655

      All of the above assets are used for charitable purposes.




                                                                                                                                32
British Association for the Advancement of Science

Notes to the financial statements

For the year ended 31 March 2024

13    Listed investments

                                                                2024         2023
                                                                   £            £

      Fair value at the start of the year                   1,228,408   1,216,970
      Additions at cost                                       395,182     429,981
      Disposal proceeds                                     (360,218)   (366,128)
      Net (loss)/gain on change in fair value                  83,755     (52,415)

                                                            1,347,127   1,228,408

      Cash held by investment broker pending reinvestment      7,400       36,395

      Fair value at the end of the year                     1,354,527   1,264,804

      Historic cost at the end of the year                  1,145,475   1,190,336


      Investments comprise:

                                                                2024         2023
                                                                   £            £

      Shares listed on the London Stock Exchange            1,347,127   1,228,408
      Cash                                                      7,400      36,395

                                                            1,354,527   1,264,804



14    Debtors

                                                                             2023
                                                                2024    (Restated)
                                                                   £            £

      Trade debtors                                           443,734     103,755
      Other debtors                                               915         209
      Prepayments                                              74,159      48,933
      Accrued income                                        1,163,409   1,601,217

                                                            1,682,216   1,754,114



15    Creditors: amounts falling due within one year

                                                                             2023
                                                                2024    (Restated)
                                                                   £            £

      Trade creditors                                        144,139      145,635
      Taxation and social security                            72,474       64,356
      Other creditors                                         61,487       84,120
      Accruals                                               188,037      410,873
      Grant accruals                                         677,285    1,630,354
      Deferred income                                        760,707      299,250

                                                            1,904,128   2,634,587




                                                                              33
British Association for the Advancement of Science

Notes to the financial statements

For the year ended 31 March 2024

16    Deferred income

      Deferred income comprises both fees received in advance of the delivery of the services and grants received for future
      financial periods.


                                                                                                            2024               2023
                                                                                                               £                  £

      Balance at the beginning of the period                                                             299,250           460,577
      Amount released to income in the period                                                          (299,250)          (460,577)
      Amount deferred in the period                                                                      760,707           299,250

      Balance at the end of the period                                                                  760,707            299,250



17a   Analysis of net assets between funds (current year)

                                                                                   Unrestricted        Restricted       2024 Total
                                                                                              £                 £               £

      Tangible fixed assets                                                            13,191                  -            13,191
      Investments                                                                   1,354,527                  -         1,354,527
      Net current assets                                                              500,462            251,567           752,029

      Net assets at the end of the year                                             1,868,181            251,567         2,119,748



17b   Analysis of net assets between funds (prior period)

                                                                                   Unrestricted        Restricted       2023 Total
                                                                                              £                 £               £

      Tangible fixed assets                                                            25,654                  -            25,654
      Investments                                                                   1,264,804                  -         1,264,804
      Net current assets                                                              531,845            238,049           769,894

      Net assets at the end of the period                                           1,822,303            238,049         2,060,352




                                                                                                                                34
British Association for the Advancement of Science

Notes to the financial statements

For the year ended 31 March 2024

18a   Movements in funds (current year)
                                                                  Incoming      Outgoing
                                                 At 1 April     resources &   resources &                     At 31 March
                                                     2023             gains        losses     Transfers             2024
                                                         £                £             £             £                 £

      Restricted funds:
      Engagement programmes
          British Science Festival                         ()      399,354      (392,054)       (7,300)                ()
          Other engagement programmes                      -     1,166,672    (1,166,672)             -                -
      Education programmes                            69,403     1,017,080    (1,007,127)             -           79,356
      Policy, Partnerships & Impact                        -             -               -            -                -
      Grants programme                               148,024     1,504,908    (1,503,951)             -          148,981
      Sections and regions                            20,623             -         (6,993)        9,600           23,230

      Total restricted funds                         238,049     4,088,015    (4,076,797)        2,300           251,567


      Unrestricted funds:
      Designated funds:
      Engagement programmes
          British Science Festival                   100,828        34,000      (188,713)         53,885               ()
          Other engagement programmes                 90,000        75,283          (7,929)     (57,354)         100,000
      Education programmes                           120,001       303,559        (56,689)    (157,871)          209,000
      Policy, Partnerships & Impact                  205,000       149,606      (310,734)         86,128         130,000
      Contingency for wind-down costs                500,000             -                -            -         500,000
      Innovation Fund                                 15,861             -                -            -          15,861

      Total designated funds                    1,031,690          562,449      (564,065)      (75,212)          954,861

      General funds                                  790,613       206,545      (156,750)       72,912           913,320


      Total unrestricted funds                  1,822,303          768,994      (720,815)       (2,300)         1,868,181

      Total funds                               2,060,352       4,857,008     (4,797,612)             -         2,119,748



18b   Movements in funds (prior period)
                                                                  Incoming      Outgoing
                                                 At 1 April     resources &   resources &                     At 31 March
                                                     2022             gains        losses     Transfers    2023 (Restated)
                                                         £                £             £             £                  £
      Restricted funds:
      Engagement programmes
          British Science Festival                         -     1,056,560    (1,046,960)       (9,600)                ()
          Other engagement programmes                 17,392       869,754      (887,146)             -                -
      Education programmes                           170,388       928,146    (1,029,131)             -           69,403
      Policy, Partnerships & Impact                        -       144,717      (144,717)             -                -
      Grants programme                               134,666     2,775,398    (2,762,040)             -          148,024
      Sections and regions                            16,672             -         (5,649)        9,600           20,623

      Total restricted funds                         339,118     5,774,574    (5,875,643)             -          238,049


      Unrestricted funds:
      Designated funds:
      Engagement programmes
          British Science Festival                    80,000             -        (14,071)       34,899          100,828
          Other engagement programmes                 80,000        65,700        (77,983)       22,283           90,000
      Education programmes                           145,000       244,923        (76,839)    (193,083)          120,001
      Policy, Partnerships & Impact                  225,000       136,110      (246,098)        89,988          205,000
      Contingency for wind-down costs                500,000             -               -            -          500,000
      Innovation Fund                                 15,861             -               -            -           15,861

      Total designated funds                    1,045,861          446,733      (414,991)      (45,913)         1,031,690

      General funds                                  787,990       156,269      (199,559)       45,913           790,613


      Total unrestricted funds                  1,833,851          603,002      (614,550)             -         1,822,303

      Total funds                               2,172,969       6,377,576     (6,490,193)             -         2,060,352




                                                                                                                      35
British Association for the Advancement of Science

Notes to the financial statements

For the year ended 31 March 2024

19    Movements in funds - descriptions

      Purposes of restricted funds

      Festival of Science
      These are funds received specifically to deliver the Festival of Science and have been fully spent in the year.

      Other engagement programmes
      These are funds received specifically to deliver Engagement Programmes and have been fully spent in the year.



      Grants Programme
      These are funds received directly to deliver the Ideas Fund programme. At the year end some grant funding had not been fully
      spent and has been carried forward.

      Education
      These are funds received predominantly to deliver work relating to Educational programmes including CREST Awards. At the
      year end some grant funding (£60k) has been carried forward for use on the CREST Website development and the remainder
      is unspent grand funding from 1851 which is to be spent in 2024/35.

      Policy, Partnerships & Impact
      These are funds received in order to deliver PPI Programmes and have been fully spent in the year.


      Sections
      Sections raise their own funds as well as receive contributions from the engagement programmes. The majority of the
      balances are restricted funding from the British Science Festival.

19    Movements in funds - descriptions (continued)

      Purposes of designated funds

      Engagement
      These are funds set aside by management in order to support the activities of the Engagement team in the coming financial
      year if required.

      Education
      These are funds set aside by management in order to support the activities of the Education Team in the coming financial
      year if required. There are also funds £109k) designated towards the continuing development of the CREST Website.

      Policy, Partnerships & Impact
      These are funds set aside by management in order to support the activities of the PPI Team in the coming financial year if
      required.

      Contingency for wind-down costs
      We currently hold £500,000 in designated reserves as a contingency in the case of wind down.


      Innovation Fund
      The availability of this fund encourages our staff to develop and implement ideas that contribute to our strategic goals during
      the year.

      Transfers between funds
      Transfers have been made between funds to enable the right reserves to be available in the right areas as described above.




                                                                                                                                   36
British Association for the Advancement of Science

Notes to the financial statements

For the year ended 31 March 2024

20    Reconciliation of net income / (expenditure) to net cash flow from operating activities

                                                                                                           2024                2023
                                                                                                              £                   £

      Net income / (expenditure) for the reporting period                                                59,396           (112,615)
      (as per the statement of financial activities)
      Depreciation charges                                                                               15,474              13,169
      (Profit)/loss on the disposal of fixed assets                                                           -                 345
      (Gains)/losses on investments                                                                    (83,755)              52,414
      Dividends, interest and rent from investments                                                    (34,676)            (20,261)
      (Increase)/decrease in debtors                                                                     71,897            127,601
      Increase/(decrease) in creditors                                                                (730,459)              78,231

      Net cash provided by / (used in) operating activities                                           (702,122)            138,884



21    Analysis of cash and cash equivalents

                                                                                  At 31 March                           At 31 March
                                                                                        2023          Cash flows              2024
                                                                                            £                  £                  £

      Cash at bank and in hand                                                      1,650,368           676,425            973,942
      Cash awaiting investment                                                         36,395           (28,995)             7,400

      Total cash and cash equivalents                                               1,686,763           647,430            981,342



22    Operating lease commitments

      The charity's total future minimum lease payments under non-cancellable operating leases is as follows for each of the
      following periods.
                                                                                                             Property


                                                                                                           2024                2023
                                                                                                              £                   £

      Less than 1 year                                                                                   69,115             67,102
      1 - 5 Years                                                                                       276,460            268,408
      Over 5 years                                                                                      967,610          1,006,529

                                                                                                      1,313,185          1,342,039


      The commitment relates to the service charge due under the Wellcome Wolfson Building lease. The term of the lease is for 40
      years from 29 September 2003 increasing by inflation each year.




                                                                                                                                37
British Association for the Advancement of Science

Notes to the financial statements

For the year ended 31 March 2024

23    Detail of branches, and sections and regions restricted funds


                                                           Incoming         Outgoing
                                         At 1 April      resources &      resources &               At 31 March
                                             2023              gains           losses   Transfers          2024
Sections and regions
Agriculture & Food                             834                    -         (439)         450          845
Anthropology                                 (157)                    -         (172)         450          121
Biological Sciences                            338                    -         (465)         450          323
Chemistry                                    5,073                    -         (468)     (1,400)        3,205
Economics                                    1,871                    -         (125)         450        2,196
Education                                    1,465                    -         (176)         450        1,739
Engineering                                  3,065                    -         (416)         450        3,099
General                                      1,270                    -         (839)         450          881
Geography                                    2,336                    -         (218)         450        2,568
Geology                                      1,007                    -             -         450        1,457
History of Science                             568                    -         (471)         450          547
Mathematics                                  1,352                    -         (866)         450          936
Medical Sciences                               795                    -             -         450        1,245
Physics                                        219                    -         (200)         450          469
Psychology                                   2,398                    -         (625)         450        2,223
Science & The Arts                             136                    -       (1,149)       1,950          937
Sociology                                      352                    -         (363)         450          439


Total sections and regions
restricted funds                            22,923                    -       (6,992)      7,300        23,230




                                                                                                              38
British Association for the Advancement of Science

Notes to the financial statements

For the year ended 31 March 2024

24    Prior Year Adjustment: Charity Reserves Position

                                                                        31 March 2023
                                                         Unrestricted       Restricted         Total
                                                                    £                £            £

      Funds Previously Reported                           1,822,303           238,049     2,060,352

      Adjustments:
      Ideas Fund Income                                            -        (409,061)     (409,061)
      Ideas Fund Expenditure                                       -          409,061       409,061


      Funds restated                                      1,822,303           238,049     2,060,352



      Prior Year Adjustment: Charity Income and Expense

                                                                      31 March 2023
                                                         Unrestricted     Restricted           Total
                                                                    £              £              £

      Net movement of funds previously reported             (11,547)        (101,068)     (112,615)

      Adjustments:
      Ideas Fund Income                                            -        (409,061)     (409,061)
      Ideas Fund Expenditure                                       -          409,061       409,061


      Funds restated                                        (11,547)        (101,068)     (112,615)



      Details of adjustments

      Ideas Fund Income and Expenditure have been adjusted to reflect more accurate
      information provided in relation to committed dates for grants, meaning that too high a value
      of grants was recognised in the year to 31 March 2023.




                                                                                                 39
