                              British Science Association Annual Report (2024/25)




The British Association for the Advancement of Science
                       Trading as
         The British Science Association (BSA)




               Trustees’ Annual Report
             1 April 2024 to 31 March 2025




                                    Charity registration number: 212479
                         Scotland charity registration number: SC039236




                                                                              1
                                                  British Science Association Annual Report (2024/25)




Foreword from the Chair of Trustees and Chief Executive

We are pleased to present the Trustees’ Annual Report for the British Science Association
(BSA), covering the period from 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025. In our roles as Chair of
Trustees and Chief Executive, we are continually inspired by the Association’s programmes,
working with partners across the UK to bring people and science together in meaningful
ways that will have a lasting positive impact on communities, research and society.

Our work continues to demonstrate that science is not an isolated endeavour, but a
collective journey in which everyone has a role to play. Through our strong networks and
partnerships, we work to ensure that science is connected, relevant, and representative of
the diverse society we serve. By nurturing curiosity and opening doors to opportunities, we
aim to foster a culture where science belongs to us all.

Through our work we see time and again the impact that inclusive approaches can have –
inspiring young people through CREST and British Science Week to see themselves as
scientists for the first time, empowering communities to engage with research and develop
solutions tailored to their needs, and bringing together diverse audiences and researchers in
a different UK city each year through the British Science Festival. The BSA remains
steadfast in its commitment to breaking down barriers and ensuring that all of society is
included in science.

As we look back on the achievements of the past year, we also acknowledge the challenges
and uncertainties facing our sector and society as a whole. Science has a crucial role to play
in addressing pressing issues, from health and wellbeing to climate change and
technological innovation. As part of this work we have been delighted this year to be
awarded the UKRI contract for the Public Attitudes to Science survey, working in partnership
with Ipsos Mori and the new UKRI contract for Sciencewise, working in partnership with
Involve and the National Co-ordinating Centre for Public Engagement (NCCPE).

On behalf of the Board of Trustees and Senior Management Team, we extend heartfelt
thanks to our partners, funders, volunteers, staff, and all those who share in our mission.
Your contributions, insights, and commitment enable the BSA to thrive and adapt in a rapidly
changing world. We would also like to express our sincere gratitude to our President for
2024/25, Professor Kevin Fenton, for his unwavering support throughout the year.

Together, we look forward with optimism – confident that by working collaboratively and
inclusively, we can help shape a society in which science is truly for everyone.




            Hilary Newiss,                          Hannah Russell,
            Chair of Trustees                       Chief Executive




                                                                                                  2
                                                   British Science Association Annual Report (2024/25)


Overview of the BSA
Founded in 1831, the British Science Association is a registered charity that works
with partners across the UK to bring people and science together.

We improve young peoples’ experiences of science in their education
We work with community groups and grassroots organisations to give them opportunities to
be involved with science.
We showcase the amazing work of researchers and academics through our events and
activities.
We advocate for a more inclusive science community.

Our vision
A future where science is more relevant, representative and connected to society.

Our mission
The BSA believes that all of society should be included in science.
We bring people and science together in ways that will have a lasting, positive impact on
communities, research and society.
Our goals put our audiences at the heart of what we do – we will be led by their needs first.




                                                                                                   3
                                                           British Science Association Annual Report (2024/25)


Section One: Objectives and Achievements
Our ten-year objectives are:

A) For more people, especially those from currently underrepresented groups, to feel that
science is relevant to their lives
    • Provide engagement activities that effectively reach and engage underserved
       audiences with science and use these activities to understand and disseminate
       good practice.
    • Enrich young people’s experience of science in a way that encourages more of them
       to see science as relevant to their lives and to study/work in science.
    • Partner with communities to enable them to conduct, influence or apply
       science/research e.g. involvement in discussions about emerging technologies,
       decisions on research funding priorities, citizen science.

B) For more people, especially those from currently underrepresented groups, to play a
bigger role, have a more powerful voice, and build stronger relationships in/with the STEM
sector
    • Amplify the ‘missing voices’ in science to champion those whose voices are often
        overlooked in science-based conversations.
    • Set up participatory structures to facilitate dialogue, foster mutual understanding
        and transfer power between communities and science/research professionals.
    • Enable collaboration and dialogue to improve the way science is applied and used
        among business, policy and third sectors.

C) Build the capacity of the BSA and the science community to:
   • Understand and address structural inequalities in accessing science education,
        employment and engagement opportunities.
   • Advocate for the adoption of a more participatory and transformative form of science
        engagement.
   • Improve the BSA’s and science community’s diversity and inclusivity in order to
        represent all of society.

Objective C was broadened from its original version in March 2023, reflecting the BSA’s
work to support EDI across the wider science community as well as within the
science/research engagement sector1.

These objectives are supported by a three-year business plan covering the period April 2024
to March 2027. This sets out the following five goals:

    1) Transform science education for all young people – By 2027, the BSA wants the
       science curriculum to be more relevant to young people and to offer more
       opportunities for them to take the lead on science projects and practical
       investigations as part of their education. We will also champion and showcase a
       wider range of diverse role models in science.

    2) Put communities at the heart of research and innovation – By 2027, the BSA will
       have led a sector-wide shift that places communities and researchers on equal
       ground in their interactions together. We will develop an evidence-based model for

1 Previous wording for Objective C:

To build the capacity of the BSA and the science/research engagement sector to:
    •     Understand and address structural inequalities in science engagement.
    •     Advocate for the adoption of a more participatory and transformative form of science engagement.
    •     Improve the BSA’s/sector’s diversity and inclusivity.

                                                                                                             4
                                                   British Science Association Annual Report (2024/25)

       change, rooted in lived experience, for funders, partners, and other leaders in the
       sector to use.

   3) Give the public a voice on science decisions – By 2027, the BSA will have
      influenced a change in how decisions about science are made. Seldom heard
      communities, including young people, will be given greater opportunity to have their
      say on topics that affect their lives and livelihoods.

   4) Drive towards a more representative science community – By 2027, the BSA will
      have worked alongside Government to establish a greater commitment to improving
      the equity, diversity and inclusion of science, technology and engineering.

   5) Champion the role of science festivals – By 2027, the BSA wants festivals to be
      recognised as an essential contributor to their communities, through the relationships
      they build between science, local partners and audiences.

We also have an additional internal business goal (Goal 6) to increase visibility and profile
for the BSA.

The following pages provide an overview of our key achievements for the period April 2024
to March 2025 set against our business plan goals.


Goal 1 – Transform science education for all young people
a. British Science Week (BSW)
An annual grassroots celebration of science with events and activities taking place in
schools, local community groups and national cultural institutions across the UK. As well as
free resources, we provide ‘micro grants’ to schools and community groups to enable them
to participate.


British Science Week 2025 took place from March 7-16 2025, with the theme of 'change
and adapt'. Core funded by UKRI, with support from many of the partners listed in this
report, highlights from this year included:


   •   Activity Packs: Four new activity packs (early years, primary school, secondary
       school and community groups), attracting nearly 110,000 downloads, with an
       estimated conservative reach of 3.4 million young people for the primary and
       secondary packs alone (based on one year group per UK school engaging with a
       British Science Week activity). This compares to 2.6 million in 2024.
   •   Poster Competitions: Over 77,600 entries for our two poster competition categories
       this year, including a special challenge in partnership with University College London
       related to improving indoor air quality.
   •   Our Smashing Stereotypes campaign (celebrating the diverse people and careers
       in science and engineering) attracted over 26,000 page views on our website and
       significant media coverage.
   •   Our BSW grant schemes continued to be heavily oversubscribed, with over 1,000
       applications from schools in challenging circumstances, and 373 applications for
       community grants.



                                                                                                   5
                                                    British Science Association Annual Report (2024/25)

    •   In partnership with the Royal Institution (Ri) we co-hosted a British Science Week
        event showcasing 200 years of science demonstrations, attracting a sell-out
        audience.

b. CREST and the Engage Network
CREST is the BSA’s flagship education programme, which inspires young people to think
and behave like scientists and engineers. CREST recognises young people’s achievement
in STEM project work and is available at a range of levels to suit students aged 3 to 19.

Engage is a community of teachers in schools in challenging circumstances who share
ideas, access inspiring resources and apply for grants to help bring science, technology,
engineering and maths (STEM) to life for all young people.

Approximately 56,000 submissions were made for CREST Awards from April 2024 to March
2025 (an increase from 50,000 submissions in 2023/24), of which over 50% were from girls.

Our Engage Network has also continued to grow and now includes over 2,700 teachers from
schools in challenging circumstances working to transform access to relevant and
meaningful science work for all children and young people, especially those typically under-
represented in STEM.
We received 192 applications for this year’s Engage Grants and awarded 77 grants to
support schools in challenging circumstances to undertake CREST Awards. Examples
included:

-   A school in London aiming to make science accessible and enjoyable for lower
    secondary learners of all prior abilities in science (including a high proportion of students
    with English as an additional language) using Bronze CREST Awards
-   An alternative provision unit in the West Midlands, supporting young people with
    complex mental health issues to do Bronze CREST Awards
We also supported an additional 55 Engage schools to undertake CREST Awards with
‘Simply CREST’ support.
Our CREST kit box offering has also continued to grow. With thanks to funding from the
Royal Commission for the Exhibition of 1851 we have provided upper primary boxes to 25
schools in challenging circumstances across the UK and have developed two new early
years boxes. Demand for the boxes has been huge, with 500 expressions of interest for the
25 upper primary boxes sent out in October 2025, and feedback has also been excellent.

International CREST has been a particular success this year, with an increase of 5,000
awards compared to the previous year, reflecting growing recognition of the value of CREST
outside the UK. We continue to work closely with Pearson to deliver CREST in China.

Alongside these activities, we have also been working to develop a new CREST website,
which will be launched in summer 2025.

c. Education policy
Drawing on our experience and expertise in delivering science education programmes, we
work with policy makers and other key stakeholders across the sector to advocate for
changes to the science education landscape, particularly around practical work, project-
based learning and equity, diversity and inclusion.

In 2024/25 this work has included contributing to the Department for Education Curriculum
and Assessment review led by Professor Becky Francis. We have also been pleased to
                                                                                                    6
                                                  British Science Association Annual Report (2024/25)

support a new programme of work on gender pathways into engineering and technology led
by Engineering UK, British Computing Society, the Chartered Institute for IT, the Royal
Academy of Engineering, the Women’s Engineering Society (WES) and Women into
Science and Engineering (WISE). As part of this programme six working groups have been
established, with the BSA co-leading the project-based learning group in partnership with
Orbyts.

Goal 2 – Put communities at the heart of research and
innovation
The British Science Association is committed to supporting community organisations who
work with groups underserved and under-represented in science. Since 2015, the BSA has
supported communities to feel more involved with science. We run a range of programmes
providing communities with an opportunity to engage with science, have a voice in science
and explore science-related issues in a way that is relevant to them.

a. Community Engagement Network
Our Community Engagement Network aims to support, connect and inspire community
organisations interested in providing science content to their audiences/users. We work with
over 1,500 community representatives as part of the network, enabling us to reach a diverse
range of audiences across the UK.

Our Community Leaders and Buddies programmes harness the passion and ideas of
individuals who work with underserved audiences, enhance their skills to enable them to
become leaders in science engagement in their communities and support them to access
local researchers who they can work together with in their engagement activities.

Although the funding for the Community Leaders and Buddies programmes in their current
form has now come to an end, the grant funded phase of the final round of Community
Buddies continued into 2024/25, where with funding from UKRI we supported nine grant
funded collaborative projects with community organisations and researchers/research
organisations to deliver projects involving joint approaches to science engagement.

b. Community-led Research Pilot (CLRP)
This UKRI-funded project, exploring an approach to more equitable, community-driven
research, is nearly complete. Six grassroot community groups and researchers have worked
together to deliver a diverse range of projects, for example:

-   Reading HongKongers worked with a crop sciences researcher to explore the feasibility
    of growing culture-based crops and the impacts of social integration of new immigrants.
-   TRIYBE, a Black heritage-led community organisation, worked with two academic
    researchers to investigate, understand and raise awareness of the mental, emotional,
    spiritual, and physical impacts that Black hair products have on Reading’s Black
    Heritage community.
The programme evaluation will be published in 2025/26.

c. Ideas Fund:
The Ideas Fund launched in January 2021 with the aim of enabling the UK public to develop
and try out ideas that address problems related to mental wellbeing, by working in
partnership with researchers. Supported by Wellcome, the Fund has offered an exciting
opportunity to test out a different approach, of community-led collaboration with researchers,

                                                                                                  7
                                                   British Science Association Annual Report (2024/25)

with individuals, community groups and charities being invited to apply for and hold the
funds, and supported to build relationships with researchers on their own terms.

A key strand of work for The Ideas Fund this year has been building the evidence base
around community-led approaches to working with researchers. We have awarded £1.73m
in Evidence Building grants to 13 projects. These projects will run over the next three years.

The rest of the portfolio of work has continued to be delivered on time and within budget, and
we are continuing to explore opportunities for wider partnerships.


d. Community Engaged Research essays series
With funding from UKRI we published a new series of essays (Creating Knowledge
Together) exploring the power of community-engaged research. The essays were written as
collaborations between researchers and community partners, with each speaking directly to
the urgent challenges facing our society and the role of community-engaged research in
shaping policies and driving change to improve impact. Examples of subjects covered in the
essay series include: the advancement of equity for Black communities through community
research; the importance of listening to lived experience in health inequalities research; an
exploration of the dynamic between scientists and communities; and how power between
public research partners and communities can be fair and equitable.

e. Highlands and Islands Grant Programme
The Highlands and Islands Climate Change Community Grant scheme, funded by UKRI and
delivered by the BSA and Science Ceilidh, has supported community groups in the
Highlands and Islands of Scotland to work with a researcher and run a project on a local
climate change issue that matters to them.

The 15 projects supported through this programme (9 Building Capacity and 6 New Voices)
came to an end in 2024 and the project evaluation has now been completed. Groups and
researchers have been invited to join Science Ceilidh's Community Knowledge Matters
Network, to ensure continued share learning around community-led approaches to research
and consider the potential for future partnership. UK Antarctic Heritage Trust community
grants

On behalf of the UK Antarctic Heritage Trust we are awarding micro grants to grassroots
community groups for them to run activities inspired by Antarctica. This is the second round
of grants through this partnership.


Goal 3 – Give the public a voice on science decisions
a. Sciencewise
Sciencewise is a public dialogue programme providing insights into what people think about
science & emerging technology.

We were pleased to be selected this year as the successful bidders for the renewed UKRI
Sciencewise contract as part of a consortium led by Involve and also including the National
Coordinating Centre for Public Engagement (NCCPE). The contract covers delivery of
Sciencewise until 2030.

In 2024/25 we published the second of our reports on Engineering Biology (focusing on food
– the first report had focused on health) and a new report on Ultra-Processed Foods. Both
reports have been well received and widely quoted.


                                                                                                   8
                                                  British Science Association Annual Report (2024/25)

b. Public Attitudes to Science Survey (PAS)
PAS produces detailed, representative evidence of public opinion that policymakers and the
science community use to support decisions about science - from AI to health to
climate - and ensure more voices are listened to.

We were delighted to have been awarded the UKRI contract for the Public Attitudes to
Science survey this year, working in partnership with Ipsos Mori. This funding will cover the
period 2024-2030. The work is supported by an Advisory Group of experts in science policy
and engagement, co-chaired by Professor Chris Johnson, Chief Scientific Adviser in the
Department for Science, Innovation, and Technology (DSIT), and Catherine Day, Deputy
Director in the Cabinet Office.


c. For Thought
A thought leadership programme which gives leaders from business, policy, science and civil
society a platform for cross-sector discussion and collaboration around the role of science in
solving the greatest challenges of the day, and how science can better work alongside other
sectors.

This year’s For Thought summit was held in January 2025 at the Royal Society, supported
by MSD. Through a series of short talks, a panel discussion, and networking, our speakers
and 200 guests explored what leaders in our boardrooms, higher education institutions, and
in Government, are doing, or could be doing, to foster agile and responsible innovation that
responds to peoples’ values and expectations. Chaired by Samira Ahmed, speakers
included the Science Minister, Lord Patrick Vallance (by video), Tera Allas CBE, Professor
Sarah Harper CBE, Madhumita Murgia, Lord David Willetts, Dr Rhian-Mari Thomas,
Professor Dame Ijeoma Uchegbu, Stephen Fitzpatrick, Dame Melanie Dawes and Dr
Virginia Acha.


d. Future Forum
Empowering young people to share their views on cutting-edge innovations that will affect
their futures.
Despite continued interest in our youth voice work, we unfortunately weren’t able to secure
funding for a new Future Forum project in 2024/25. However we are excited to be working in
partnership with LEGO in 2025/26 to conduct a new Future Forum on their sustainability
strategy.


Goal 4 – Drive towards a more representative science
community
APPG on Diversity & Inclusion in STEM
The All-Party Parliamentary Group (APPG) on Diversity & Inclusion (D&I) in STEM aims to
promote inclusion and progression of people from diverse backgrounds in STEM, and to
encourage government, parliamentarians, academics, businesses, and other stakeholders to
work towards a STEM sector that is representative of the population. The Group is funded by
a wide range of sponsors. The BSA has provided the Secretariat for the Group since its
inception in 2018/19.

In accordance with government rules, the APPG was disbanded ahead of the 2024 General
Election and has now been re-registered. The number of Officers has also been reduced
from 9 to 4 in accordance with new APPG guidelines. The group currently has 34 members,
including 19 MPs and 15 Lords/Baronesses, and 12 sponsors, with new sponsors this year
                                                                                                  9
                                                   British Science Association Annual Report (2024/25)

including the British Society for Immunology and Society for Experimental Biology.
Samantha Nibblett MP has taken over as Chair of the APPG from Chi Onwurah.

Following a call for ideas for new topics, the focus for this year’s APPG project was on EDI
strategies in STEM, leading to a new report published in March 2025, accompanied by an
event on the same topic including an address by Baroness Brown of Cambridge.

Other activities
In December 2024 the British Science Association partnered with the Royal Academy of
Engineering (RAEng) on a parliamentary event bringing together a panel of business and
policy experts to discuss the recent RAEng EDI Engine report and experiences of how EDI
benefits engineering and the wider STEM sector.


Goal 5 – Champion the role of science festivals
a. British Science Festival
An annual celebration of the people, stories and ideas at the heart of science, hosted by a
different city each September

The 2024 British Science Festival was hosted by the University of East London, with over
100 events across five days and multiple venues on and off campus, including arts venues
and the Westfield Shopping centre. The event reached over 5,000 people, including strong
representation from groups typically under-represented in science. The 2025 Festival will be
held in Liverpool, hosted by the University of Liverpool and Liverpool John Moores
University.

b. UK Science Festivals Network (UKSFN) and Making Connections
Core funded by UKRI, the BSA manages and chairs the UK Science Festivals Network
(UKSFN), including science festivals and other festivals featuring science content. The
Network aims to unite, celebrate and grow the science festivals sector in the UK.

The UK Science Festivals Network brings together around 40 of the key UK Science
Festivals which collectively engage hundreds of thousands of children and adults with STEM
in 800,000 to 1 million participant interactions every year. The UKSFN supports around 40
Festivals, with regular meetings and events held throughout the year on topics ranging from
VR space experiences to careers guidance and the role of Festivals in supporting local
industry. We led a session at the BIG Science Communicators conference in July 2024 and
awarded the Josh Award in collaboration with BIG and the Association of Science and
Discovery Centres. This award recognises early-career science communicators.

The 2025 UKSFN conference was held in Bristol in February 2025, welcoming
approximately 60 attendees from across the festivals sector and beyond. The conference
included sessions on working with activists, widening participation and inclusion, event risk
management, art/science collaborations, community voice and more.

Making Connections provides UKSFN members with the opportunity to facilitate the
engagement of audiences underserved and underrepresented in science with research by
bringing them together with active researchers. The 2024 round of Making Connections
made nine awards to a range of Festivals, including two that had not received grants from us
before. This year we have also introduced new opportunities for awardees to share progress
and learnings with each other.
                                                                                                   10
                                                  British Science Association Annual Report (2024/25)


Goal 6 (Internal business goal) Increase visibility and profile for
the BSA
The last 12 months have seen a period of political change and economic uncertainty within
and outside the UK. We recognise the need to increase the visibility and profile of our work
and the importance of our Mission and Vision to maximise our impact and ensure long term
sustainability.

In 2024/25, we developed new corporate communications and fundraising strategies for the
BSA, nested within the new business plan.

The evolving social media landscape has led to changes in content regulation, engagement
and many organisations moving platforms. In December 2024, we launched our BSA
BlueSky account and have begun to use LinkedIn more regularly, and have seen our
followers increase to 13,250. As part of our new corporate communications plan we will be
reviewing our social media presence to ensure we are best positioned to engage with
audiences effectively.

We also took the decision to decommission and close www.sciencelive.net, a listings
website for science events and presenters that had not been widely used over recent years.
The British Science Festival and British Science Week continue to be high profile events that
gain local, regional and sector media interest and engagement on social media.

The British Science Festival 2024 in East London was widely covered by British media,
including the Evening Standard, Londonist, New Scientist, The Times, Daily Mail – among
the most popular stories being research news of a realistic touch device which allows you to
virtually ‘hold a loved one’s hand from thousands of miles away’.

Our Smashing Stereotypes campaign during British Science Week 2025 received industry
recognition in campaign of the week features from Creative Moment and PR Week. The
Voice highlighted Black scientists in the campaign and visually impaired astronomer Nic
Bonne appeared on ITV Meridian and in the Portsmouth News, as well as across Guide
Dogs for the Blind’s social media.

In November 2024 , following a BSA event with 3M on the future of AI and innovation in the
UK, 3M’s media partner the New Statesman released a podcast of the panel discussion on
their website and YouTube – viewed over 3,000 times.

Following our annual For Thought event, Professor Sarah Harper – one of the event
speakers – was interviewed for BBC London 94.9 (appearing across BBC regional radio) in
January 2025, mentioning that she’d just been speaking ‘at the British Science Association’
on improving productivity in the UK in an ageing population with a low birth rate.

In February 2025, we announced £1,725,755 in Ideas Fund Evidence Building Grants for
community projects, with the news picked up by local media across three of our four regions,
including the Oldham Chronicle, Oldham Times, Derry Journal, and Shetland News


                                                                                                  11
                                                     British Science Association Annual Report (2024/25)


Section Two: Our future plans
As set out in Section One, in April 2024, we launched our new three-year business plan ,
covering the period April 2024 to March 2027.

This includes the following five goals as we head towards the next phase of our 10-year
strategy:
    • Transform science education for all young people
    • Put communities at the heart of research and innovation
    • Give the public a voice on science decisions
    • Drive towards a more representative science community
    • Champion the role of science festivals

We also have an additional internal business goal to increase visibility and profile for the
BSA.

In order to support the delivery of these goals, we will also continue to prioritise the following
cross-cutting themes and enablers:

-   Growing the reach and impact of our programmes, including building new
    partnerships and enabling and sharing best practice, both within and outside the BSA
-   Increasing beneficiary voice – ensuring the voice and needs of our beneficiaries
    informs and is highlighted within our work
-   Embedding equity, diversity and inclusion throughout our activities
-   Financial diversity and sustainability – ensuring we have the breadth and level of
    resources to support our aspirations
-   Effective information technology, with the right systems and processes to support
    delivery of our strategic plan
-   Continuing to build the skills and capacity of the team and ensure a welcoming,
    diverse and inclusive culture, reflecting our values and the wider focus of our work.
-   Continued strong governance to provide the support and challenge needed to deliver
    our strategy.



Section Three: Financial Review
The Statement of Financial Activities shows a net deficit for the year of £30,322 (2024: net
deficit of £24,358) excluding net gain on investment assets of £50,087 (2024: £83,755
gain).

Key funders of activities during the year include UKRI, East London University and the
Wellcome Trust.

Total income of £6.45 million was higher than last year (2024: £4.77 million).

Total expenditure of £6.48 million was higher than last year (2024: £4.80 million).

The expenditure on individual programmes shown on the SOFA is dependent on the
activities within the programmes and the funding received.




                                                                                                     12
                                              British Science Association Annual Report (2024/25)

Funders / sponsors:

3M
All About STEM
Applied Microbiology International
British Society for Haematology
British Society for Immunology
Centre for Industry Education Collaboration (CIEC)
Collins
Digital Catapult
Engineering UK
Fujitsu
Fun Science
Institution of Engineering and Technology
James Weir Foundation
Learning Through Landscapes
Mammal Society
Mewburn Ellis
MSD
NFU Education
OKIDO
Pearson China
Physiological Society
Primary Science Teaching Trust
Radio Society of Great Britain
Ricardo
Royal Academy of Engineering
Royal Commission for the Exhibition of 1851
Royal Museums Greenwich
Royal Society
Royal Society of Chemistry
Science Council
Society for Experimental Biology
STEM Learning
Sustrans
Medical Research Council (Adolescent Health Study)
The Institute of Cancer Research, London
The Worshipful Company of Horners
University College London
UK Antarctic Heritage Trust
UK Research & Innovation (UKRI)
University of East London
University of Reading (SEE & EAT)
University of the West of England (UWE), Bristol
Urenco
VICTA
Wellcome Trust
Wellcome Connecting Science
Welsh Government
WWF-UK

                                                                                              13
                                                                British Science Association Annual Report (2024/25)

Risk Management
The purpose of the BSA’s Risk & Issue Register is to enable the British Science
Association’s Trustees to identify the main risks and issues the charity faces and record how
to deal with them. The information in this framework is reviewed quarterly by the Senior
Management Team, Finance Director and Finance, Audit & Risk Committee. Principal risks
and issues (those identified as ones that would have a significant impact on ability to deliver
our charitable objectives) are reported by default at each Council meeting, alongside other
risks and issues where ratings have changed significantly since the last meeting.

Each section of the register is divided into five areas based on Charity Commission guidance
(CC262):

    1.   Strategic risks and issues
    2.   Operational risks and issues
    3.   Financial risks and issues
    4.   Governance risks and issues
    5.   Compliance and legislative risks and issues


Principal risks identified for the organisation and associated mitigations include:

     •    Funding concentration leading to over-reliance on a small number of high-
          value funders. We have developed a new fundraising strategy to support the BSA
          in diversifying its funding sources and are actively exploring business development
          opportunities, including through international sales of CREST. We continue to have
          close working relationships with our key funders.
     •    Programme misalignment with strategy. This has been mitigated through our new
          three-year business plan, quarterly impact dashboard and agreed KPIs. Strategic
          alignment is actively considered during programme development and Council
          conducts regular deep dives into progress on business plan goals.
     •    Loss of funding through competition, threat of recession or change in funding
          model/strategic direction of major funders. This is mitigated by working closely
          with funding partners to understand and adapt to changes in funding models, regular
          analysis to identify competitors and (more often) potential partners, focus on
          capturing our impact, and regular review of the funding landscape to identify
          prospective new funders aligned to our strategic objectives.
     •    Team capacity not being sufficient to deliver programmes. This is mitigated by
          using a thorough process for allocating staff time and resources, effective record-
          keeping and handovers and using interim appointments, freelance staff and
          agencies to help address gaps.
     •    Cybersecurity incidents or GDPR breaches – The BSA is Cyber Essentials Plus
          accredited. We provide GDPR and cybersecurity training for all staff and have clear
          data retention policies. Expert external advisory support is in place where needed.
     •    Safeguarding incident or allegation – This year we have updated our
          safeguarding policy and processes, appointed a Designated Safeguarding Officer,
          and rolled out annual safeguarding training to all staff. Advanced training has been

2
 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/charities-and-risk-management-cc26/charities-and-risk-management-
cc26#annex-1-risk-register-template-with-examples-of-use
                                                                                                                14
                                                     British Science Association Annual Report (2024/25)

        completed by senior leaders, and the BSA is a member of the Funder Safeguarding
        Collaborative for expert support.

Reserves policy

At their meeting in July 2025, Council reviewed the existing, risk-based reserves policy,
proposed by the Finance, Audit and Risk Committee. Reserves are based on the following
key principles:

   1. Working capital provision - £500k to 800k
   2. Loss or delay in funding - £775k
   3. Wind down costs - £300k - £500k

On this basis, the BSA opted to continue to aim for unrestricted reserves between £1.6m
and £2.1m.
The reserves policy is reviewed annually by the Finance, Audit and Risk Committee to
confirm the calculations and agree the policy for the coming year.

The Trustees recognise that the current reserves are £2m and will continue to aim to work
towards holding unrestricted reserves within the above range in the coming years.

The BSA’s Trustees are satisfied that there are no concerns about the BSA’s existence as a
going concern for at least the next 12 months and will continue to investigate opportunities to
increase unrestricted funding.


Section Four: Structure, Governance and Management
The trustees have referred to the guidance contained in the Charity Commission's general
guidance on public benefit when reviewing the charity's aims and objectives and in planning
its future activities. In particular, the trustees consider how planned activities will contribute
to the aims and objectives that have been set.

Charter, statutes and rules
The British Association for the Advancement of Science was founded in 1831 and is
incorporated by Royal Charter. The Charter is dated 21 April 1928 and there have been
Supplemental Charters dated 15 August 1960, 10 February 1997. The Association’s
Statutes were revised and approved by the Privy Council in May 2006. In April 2020, the
Privy Council approved an updated version of the BSA’s Charter and Statutes.

Council has approved Rules which are reviewed regularly by Council and may be altered by
a majority vote in Council.

Registered and operating names
The British Science Association is the operating name for (and a registered trademark of)
the British Association for the Advancement of Science. The registered name of the charity
remains as the British Association for the Advancement of Science.



                                                                                                     15
                                                   British Science Association Annual Report (2024/25)

Council
The governing body of the British Science Association is Council. Members of Council
comprise the following people who are entitled to vote at Council meetings:
   • The Chair
   • The Vice (deputy) Chair
   • The Treasurer
   • Up to three Vice-Presidents who advise on specific matters
   • Up to eight people appointed as determined by Council

In addition, the President, President-elect and immediate Past President, if not Trustees, are
entitled to attend Council but not to vote.

Council normally meets four times a year, once per quarter. Its function is to agree a vision
and strategy for the charity and to direct all the affairs and business of the organisation.
Council may delegate its powers to the staff or its sub committees.

Members of Council normally serve for a period of three years with the option of being
reappointed for a further three years so long as any continuous period in office does not
normally exceed six years. In exceptional circumstances, by two thirds majority vote in
Council of all members present, a further year’s extension is permitted.

Trustee induction and training
Following their election or appointment, induction information is sent to all new Trustees
before they attend their first Council meeting. This comprises relevant Association and
Charity Commission documents and information including the Charity Governance Code.
External training opportunities for new and existing Trustees are offered in addition to away
days and ad hoc meetings. Council members are invited to many of the Association’s
external events.

Finance Committee (April – June 2024)
Finance Committee was chaired by the Treasurer and comprised between four and six
Council members, plus the Chief Executive as voting members, with the Finance Director
also attending meetings as a non-voting member. Meetings were held four times per year.
The purpose of the Committee was to assist Council in supervising the broad direction of the
Association’s financial affairs at a strategic level, providing a forum for more detailed
consideration of the financial strategy and financial risk, acting as a sounding board for
discussion with management and for the supervision and control of the Association’s
investments.

Audit & Risks Committee (April – June 2024)
The Audit & Risks Committee comprised three members of Council, including the Treasurer.
Council was able to co-opt further persons if needed to provide additional expertise or an
external perspective, provided they did not outnumber the Council appointees. The
Committee met at least twice a year and meetings were attended by the Finance Director
and Chief Executive.




                                                                                                   16
                                                         British Science Association Annual Report (2024/25)

Finance, Audit & Risk Committee (from June 2024)
In June 2024 it was agreed by Council that the existing Finance Committee and Audit &
Risks Committee should be combined into a single Finance, Audit & Risk Committee
(FarCom). The role of FarCom is to assist Council in supervising the broad direction of the
Association’s financial affairs at a strategic level, providing a forum for more detailed
consideration of the financial strategy, and risks and risk management, acting as a sounding
board for discussion with management, for the supervision and control of the Association’s
investments, and monitoring of the annual audit process. The Treasurer and the FarCom
advise Council on resource matters, ensure that resources are allocated and managed in
accordance with Council policy and Charity Commission requirements, and that the
Association’s financial affairs are conducted with probity, accountability and transparency.
FarCom is chaired by the Treasurer and comprises a minimum of three and maximum of six
Council members including the Treasurer as voting members. The Chief Executive and
Finance Director attend meetings as non-voting members. Council has the power to co-opt
further persons if needed to provide further expertise or an external perspective, provided
they do not outnumber the Council appointees.

Council has appointed a professional auditor of the Association, who is qualified for
appointment as auditor of a company in accordance with the provisions of the Charities Act.
The auditor attends meetings of the Committee as and when required.

Council Members
Council member roles and terms of office
                                                              Elected
Name                Role                                      /appointed             Retiring
Hilary Newiss      Chair                                      March 2022             March 2028 (2)
Neil Greenwood Treasurer                                      March 2024             April 2027 (1)
Heather King       VP Education                               October 2021           Nov 2027 (2)
Sarah Chaytor      VP Policy, Partnerships & Impact           March 2023             March 2026 (1)
Matthew
                   VP Engagement                              March 2024             March 2027 (1)
Howard
Joe de Sousa       Trustee (appointed)                        August 2020            August 2026 (2)
Rubina Ahmed       Trustee (appointed)                        August 2020            August 2026 (2)

Kevin Coutinho Trustee (appointed)                            March 2023             March 2026 (1)

Phil Smith         Trustee (appointed)                        March 2023             March 2026 (1)

Turi King          Trustee (appointed)                        March 2025             March 2028 (1)
Rachel
Honeyghan-         Trustee (appointed)                        March 2025             March 2028 (1)
Williams
   (1) Indicates the end of the first term of office
   (2) Indicates the end of the second term of office (where Council members have been reappointed at the
       end of the first term).




                                                                                                            17
                                                    British Science Association Annual Report (2024/25)

Council membership of sub-committees

                                                            Honorary
                         Finance, Audit &       Nominations
 Name                                                       Fellowships
                         Risk Committee         Committee
                                                            Committee
  Hilary Newiss                   Y              Y (Chair)     Y (Chair)
  Rubina Ahmed                                       Y
  Joe de Sousa                    Y                  Y
  Heather King                                       Y             Y
  Sarah Chaytor                                                    Y
  Kevin Coutinho                                     Y             Y
  Phil Smith                     Y
  Neil Greenwood              Y (Chair)
  Matthew Howard                  Y
  Turi King*
  Rachel Honeyghan-
  Williams*
* term started March 2024

President
September 2023 to August 2024 – Professor Dame Jane Francis – Director of the British
Antarctic Survey

September 2024 to August 2025 – Professor Kevin Fenton – public health physician and
infectious disease epidemiologist

2024 Honorary Fellows
Professor Tom Crick – Professor of Digital Policy at Swansea University and Chief Scientific
Adviser at the Department for Culture, Media and Sport

Alom Shaha – science teacher, writer and broadcaster

Gisela Abbam – business leader and former BSA Chair of trustees

Royal Patron
Following the death of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II in September 2022, for the 2024-
2025 year we did not have a Royal Patron.

Equity, Diversity and Inclusion
Equity, diversity and inclusion are key to delivering the BSA’s Mission and Vision. In addition
to embedding EDI through our programmes, we also work to ensure EDI is embedded
through our organisational culture, policies and processes. In 2024/25 we began work on
developing a new EDI strategy, which will be published in 2025.

The BSA has been monitoring staff EDI data since 2017 and trustee EDI data since 2019.
We published this for the first time in 2020 and believe this is an important indication of our
commitment to EDI. Our most recent data, from our 2024/25 survey can be found at
www.britishscienceassociation.org/diversity-data




                                                                                                    18
                                                British Science Association Annual Report (2024/25)


Section Five: Reference and Administrative details
Senior Staff

Hannah Russell        Chief Executive
Gill Riches           Director of Programmes
Vijay Jassal          Director of Development & External Relations
Dave Lloyd            Director of Finance (outsourced)

Advisors

Bankers              NatWest Bank plc, 208 Piccadilly, London, W1A 2DG
Solicitors           Veale Wasbrough Vizards LLP, 45 Clarendon Road, Watford, WD17
                     1SZ
Accounting           TC Group, Kent Office (formerly Crossley Group), Star House, Star
                     Hill, Rochester, ME1 1UX
Independent auditors Sayer Vincent, 110 Golden Lane, London, EC1Y 0TG
Investment advisors James Hambro Partners LLP, 45 Pall Mall, London, SW1Y 5JG

Principal and registered office

Wellcome Wolfson Building 165 Queen’s Gate London SW7 5HD

Declarations

The Trustees declare that they have approved the Trustees’ report above.




Signed on behalf of the BSA’s Council

Signature:




Name:         Hilary Newiss
Position:     Chair
Date: 29.10.25




                                                                                                19
                                             British Science Association independent Auditor’s Report (2024/25)

Independent Auditor’s report to the members of The British Association for the
Advancement of Science


Opinion
We have audited the financial statements of The British Association for the Advancement of
Science (the ‘charity’) for the year ended 31 March 2025 which comprise the statement of financial
activities, balance sheet, statement of cash flows and notes to the financial statements, including
significant accounting policies. The financial reporting framework that has been applied in their
preparation is applicable law and United Kingdom Accounting Standards, including FRS 102 The
Financial Reporting Standard applicable in the UK and Republic of Ireland (United Kingdom
Generally Accepted Accounting Practice).


In our opinion, the financial statements:

●    Give a true and fair view of the state of the charity’s affairs as at 31 March 2025 and of its
     incoming resources and application of resources, for the year then ended
●    Have been properly prepared in accordance with United Kingdom Generally Accepted
     Accounting Practice
●    Have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Charities Act 2011 and of
     the Charities and Trustee Investment (Scotland) Act 2005 and regulation 8 of the Charities
     Accounts (Scotland) Regulations 2006 (as amended).


Basis for opinion
We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing (UK) (ISAs (UK))
and applicable law. Our responsibilities under those standards are further described in the
Auditor’s responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements section of our report. We are
independent of the charity in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our
audit of the financial statements in the UK, including the FRC’s Ethical Standard and we have
fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements. We believe that
the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our
opinion.


Conclusions relating to going concern
In auditing the financial statements, we have concluded that the trustees' use of the going concern
basis of accounting in the preparation of the financial statements is appropriate.


Based on the work we have performed, we have not identified any material uncertainties relating to
events or conditions that, individually or collectively, may cast significant doubt on The British
Association for the Advancement of Science's ability to continue as a going concern for a period of
at least twelve months from when the financial statements are authorised for issue.


Our responsibilities and the responsibilities of the trustees with respect to going concern are
described in the relevant sections of this report.


Other Information
The other information comprises the information included in the trustees’ annual report, other
than the financial statements and our auditor’s report thereon. The trustees are responsible for

                                                                                                            20
                                             British Science Association independent Auditor’s Report (2024/25)


the other information contained within the annual report. Our opinion on the financial statements
does not cover the other information and, except to the extent otherwise explicitly stated in our
report, we do not express any form of assurance conclusion thereon. Our responsibility is to read
the other information and, in doing so, consider whether the other information is materially
inconsistent with the financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the course of the audit or
otherwise appears to be materially misstated. If we identify such material inconsistencies or
apparent material misstatements, we are required to determine whether this gives rise to a
material misstatement in the financial statements themselves. If, based on the work we have
performed, we conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information, we are
required to report that fact.


We have nothing to report in this regard.


Matters on which we are required to report by exception
We have nothing to report in respect of the following matters in relation to which the Charities
(Accounts and Reports) Regulations 2008 and the Charities Accounts (Scotland) Regulations 2006
(as amended) require us to report to you if, in our opinion:

●     The information given in the trustees’ annual report is inconsistent in any material respect
      with the financial statements;
●     Sufficient and proper accounting records have not been kept; or
●     The financial statements are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns; or
●     We have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit

Responsibilities of trustees
As explained more fully in the statement of trustees’ responsibilities set out in the trustees’ annual
report, the trustees are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements and for being
satisfied that they give a true and fair view, and for such internal control as the trustees determine
is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material
misstatement, whether due to fraud or error.


In preparing the financial statements, the trustees are responsible for assessing the charity’s
ability to continue as a going concern, disclosing, as applicable, matters related to going concern
and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the trustees either intend to liquidate the
charity or to cease operations, or have no realistic alternative but to do so.


Auditor’s responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements
We have been appointed as auditor under section 144 of the Charities Act 2011 and section
44(1)(c) of the Charities and Trustee Investment (Scotland) Act 2005 and report in accordance with
regulations made under that Act.


Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a
whole are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and to issue an
auditor’s report that includes our opinion. Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance, but
is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs (UK) will always detect a
material misstatement when it exists. Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are




                                                                                                            21
                                              British Science Association independent Auditor’s Report (2024/25)


considered material if, individually or in the aggregate, they could reasonably be expected to
influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.


Irregularities, including fraud, are instances of non-compliance with laws and regulations. We
design procedures in line with our responsibilities, outlined above, to detect material
misstatements in respect of irregularities, including fraud. The extent to which our procedures are
capable of detecting irregularities, including fraud are set out below.


Capability of the audit in detecting irregularities
In identifying and assessing risks of material misstatement in respect of irregularities, including
fraud and non-compliance with laws and regulations, our procedures included the following:

●     We enquired of management and the Finance, Audit and Risk Committee, which included
      obtaining and reviewing supporting documentation, concerning the charity’s policies and
      procedures relating to:
      ● Identifying, evaluating, and complying with laws and regulations and whether they were
         aware of any instances of non-compliance;
      ● Detecting and responding to the risks of fraud and whether they have knowledge of any
         actual, suspected, or alleged fraud;
      ● The internal controls established to mitigate risks related to fraud or non-compliance
         with laws and regulations.
●     We inspected the minutes of meetings of those charged with governance.
●     We obtained an understanding of the legal and regulatory framework that the charity
      operates in, focusing on those laws and regulations that had a material effect on the
      financial statements or that had a fundamental effect on the operations of the charity from
      our professional and sector experience.
●     We communicated applicable laws and regulations throughout the audit team and remained
      alert to any indications of non-compliance throughout the audit.
●     We reviewed any reports made to regulators.
●     We reviewed the financial statement disclosures and tested these to supporting
      documentation to assess compliance with applicable laws and regulations.
●     We performed analytical procedures to identify any unusual or unexpected relationships that
      may indicate risks of material misstatement due to fraud.
●     In addressing the risk of fraud through management override of controls, we tested the
      appropriateness of journal entries and other adjustments, assessed whether the judgements
      made in making accounting estimates are indicative of a potential bias and tested significant
      transactions that are unusual or those outside the normal course of business.

Because of the inherent limitations of an audit, there is a risk that we will not detect all
irregularities, including those leading to a material misstatement in the financial statements or
non-compliance with regulation. This risk increases the more that compliance with a law or
regulation is removed from the events and transactions reflected in the financial statements, as we
will be less likely to become aware of instances of non-compliance. The risk is also greater
regarding irregularities occurring due to fraud rather than error, as fraud involves intentional
concealment, forgery, collusion, omission or misrepresentation.




                                                                                                             22
                                             British Science Association independent Auditor’s Report (2024/25)


A further description of our responsibilities is available on the Financial Reporting Council’s
website at: www.frc.org.uk/auditorsresponsibilities. This description forms part of our auditor’s
report.


Use of our report
This report is made solely to the charity's trustees as a body, in accordance with section 44(1)(c) of
the Charities and Trustee Investment (Scotland) Act 2005, section 144 of the Charities Act 2011
and regulations made under section 154 of that Act. Our audit work has been undertaken so that
we might state to the charity's trustees those matters we are required to state to them in an
auditor’s report and for no other purpose. To the fullest extent permitted by law, we do not accept
or assume responsibility to anyone other than the charity and the charity's trustees as a body, for
our audit work, for this report, or for the opinions we have formed.




Judith Miller (Senior statutory auditor)
Date: 6 November 2025

Sayer Vincent LLP, Statutory Auditor
110 Golden Lane, LONDON, EC1Y 0TG
Sayer Vincent LLP is eligible to act as auditor in terms of section 1212 of the Companies Act 2006




                                                                                                            23
British Association for the Advancement of Science

Statement of financial activities

For the year ended 31 March 2025


                                                                                                           2025                                                    2024
                                                            Unrestricted          Restricted               Total      Unrestricted         Restricted              Total
                                                  Note                 £                   £                  £                  £                  £                 £

Income from:
Donations and legacies                             2            115,938                    -           115,938            175,093                    -          175,093
Charitable activities
    Engagement programmes                          3            880,140            601,404           1,481,544            109,283          1,566,026          1,675,309
    Education programmes                           3          1,146,739             45,970           1,192,709            216,581          1,017,080          1,233,661
    Policy, Partnerships & Impact                  3            258,939                  -             258,939            149,606                  -            149,606
    Grants Programme                               3                  -          3,365,268           3,365,268                  -          1,504,908          1,504,908
Investments                                        4             32,676                  -              32,676             34,676                  -             34,676

Total income                                                  2,434,432         4,012,642           6,447,074            685,239          4,088,015          4,773,253


Expenditure on:                                    5
Raising funds                                                   200,943                    -           200,943            156,750                    -          156,750
Charitable activities
    Engagement programmes                          5            763,129            593,754           1,356,883            196,642          1,558,726          1,755,368
    Education programmes                           5          1,006,540            107,210           1,113,750             56,689          1,007,127          1,063,816
    Policy, Partnerships & Impact                  5            381,689                  -             381,689            310,734                  -            310,734
    Grants Programme                               5                  -          3,417,170           3,417,170                  -          1,503,951          1,503,951
    Regions, branches and sections                 5                  -              6,960               6,960                  -              6,993              6,993

Total expenditure                                             2,352,301          4,125,094           6,477,396            720,815          4,076,797          4,797,612

Net (expenditure) / income before net
gains on investments                                              82,131          (112,452)            (30,322)           (35,577)            11,219            (24,358)

Net gains on investments                                          50,087                   -            50,087             83,755                   -             83,755


Net expenditure for the period/year               7             132,218           (112,452)             19,765             48,178             11,219              59,397

Transfers between funds                            19                   -                  -                   -           (2,300)             2,300                    -


Net movement in funds                                           132,218          (112,452)              19,765             45,878             13,519              59,397
Reconciliation of funds:
Total funds brought forward                                   1,868,181            251,568           2,119,749          1,822,303           238,049           2,060,352

Total funds carried forward                       18          2,000,398            139,116          2,139,514          1,868,181            251,568          2,119,749

All of the above results are derived from continuing activities. There were no other recognised gains or losses other than those stated above. Movements in funds are
disclosed in Note 18 to the financial statements.




                                                                                                                                                             24
British Association for the Advancement of Science

Balance sheet

As at 31 March 2025


                                                                                     2025                        2024
                                                     Note                 £             £                           £

Fixed assets:
Tangible assets                                      12                             29,284                    13,191
Investments                                          13                          1,407,542                 1,354,527

                                                                                 1,436,826                 1,367,718
Current assets:
Debtors                                              14           2,791,457                   1,682,216
Cash at bank and in hand                                          1,107,751                     973,942

                                                                  3,899,208                   2,656,158
Liabilities:
Creditors: amounts falling due within one year       15         (2,280,118)                  (1,904,128)

Net current assets                                                               1,619,090                  752,030

Total assets less current liabilities                                            3,055,916                 2,119,748

Creditors: amounts falling due after one year        17                          (916,402)

Total net assets                                     18                          2,139,514                 2,119,748



The funds of the charity:                            19
Restricted income funds                                                           139,115                   251,567
Unrestricted income funds:
    Designated funds                                              1,067,458                     954,861
    General funds                                                   932,941                     913,320

Total unrestricted funds                                                         2,000,399                 1,868,181

Total charity funds                                                              2,139,514                 2,119,748




Approved by the trustees on 29.10.25             and signed on their behalf by




Hilary Newiss                                        Neil Greenwood
Chair of Council                                     General Treasurer




                                                                                                            25
British Association for the Advancement of Science

Statement of cash flows

For the year ended 31 March 2025



                                                                         2025                       2024
                                                           Note
                                                                         £             £            £              £
Cash flows from operating activities                       21

Net cash provided by / (used in) operating activities                            143,008                   (702,122)

Cash flows from investing activities:
Dividends, interest and rents from investments                     32,676                      34,676
Purchase of fixed assets                                          (38,948)                     (3,010)
Proceeds from sale of investments                                 567,573                     360,218
Purchase of investments                                           (556,132)                 (395,183)


Net cash provided by / (used in) investing activities                              5,169                     (3,299)



Change in cash and cash equivalents in the period                                148,177                   (705,421)

Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of the period                         981,342                   1,686,763



Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the period         22                   1,129,519                   981,342




                                                                                                            26
British Association for the Advancement of Science

Notes to the financial statements

For the year ended 31 March 2025

1    Accounting policies

a) Statutory information
   British Association for the Advancement of Science is an unincorporated charity registered with the Charity Commission in England & Wales
   and Scotland. The registered office address is Wellcome Wolfson Building, 165 Queen’s Gate, London, SW7 5HD.

b) Basis of preparation
   The financial statements have been prepared in accordance with Accounting and Reporting by Charities: Statement of Recommended Practice
   applicable to charities preparing their accounts in accordance with the Financial Reporting Standard applicable in the UK and Republic of
   Ireland (FRS 102) - (Charities SORP FRS 102). The Financial Reporting Standard applicable in the UK and Republic of Ireland (FRS 102) and the
   Charities Act 2011.

     The accounts have been prepared to give a ‘true and fair’ view and have departed from the Charities (Accounts and Reports) Regulations 2008
     only to the extent required to provide a ‘true and fair view’. This departure has involved following Accounting and Reporting by Charities
     preparing their accounts in accordance with the Financial Reporting Standard applicable in the UK and Republic of Ireland (FRS 102) issued on
     16 July 2014 rather than the Accounting and Reporting by Charities: Statement of Recommended Practice effective from 1 April 2005 which
     has since been withdrawn.
     Assets and liabilities are initially recognised at historical cost or transaction value except that investments held as fixed assets are carried at
     market value as at the balance sheet date.
c)   Public benefit entity
     The Association meets the definition of a public benefit entity under FRS 102.

d) Going concern
     The trustees consider that there are no material uncertainties about the Association's ability to continue as a going concern.

     The trustees do not consider that there are any sources of estimation uncertainty at the reporting date that have a significant risk of causing a
     material adjustment to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities within the next reporting period.
e) Income
   Income is recognised when the Association has entitlement to the funds, any performance conditions attached to the income have been met, it
   is probable that the income will be received and that the amount can be measured reliably.

     Income received for general purposes of the Association is credited to unrestricted funds. Income subject to specific wishes of the donor is
     credited to relevant restricted funds.
     Income received in advance of the provision of a specified service is deferred until the criteria for income recognition are met.

     Gross income received from the Association's investment portfolio is reinvested with the Association's portfolio fund managers for the
     acquisition of further stocks.

     Interest on funds held on deposit is included when receivable and the amount can be measured reliably by the Association; this is normally
     upon notification of the interest paid or payable by the bank.


f)   Donations of gifts, services and facilities
     Donated professional services and donated facilities are recognised as income when the Association has control over the item or received the
     service, any conditions associated with the donation have been met, the receipt of economic benefit from the use by the Association of the
     item is probable and that economic benefit can be measured reliably. In accordance with the Charities SORP (FRS 102), volunteer time is not
     recognised. The trustees’ annual report sets out more information about their contribution to the work of the Association.

g) Fund accounting
   Restricted funds are to be used for specific purposes as laid down by the donor. Expenditure which meets these criteria is charged to the
   fund.
   Unrestricted funds are donations and other incoming resources received or generated for charitable purposes.

     Designated funds are unrestricted funds earmarked by the trustees for particular purposes.




                                                                                                                                                 27
British Association for the Advancement of Science

Notes to the financial statements

For the year ended 31 March 2025

1    Accounting policies (continued)

h) Expenditure and irrecoverable VAT
   Expenditure is recognised once there is a legal or constructive obligation to make a payment to a third party, it is probable that settlement will
   be required and the amount of the obligation can be measured reliably. Expenditure is classified under the following activity headings:

        Costs of raising funds relate to the costs incurred by the Association in inducing third parties to make voluntary contributions to it, as
          well as the cost of any activities with a fundraising purpose
        Expenditure on charitable activities includes the costs of delivering services, exhibitions and other educational activities undertaken to
          further the purposes of the Association and their associated support costs
        Other expenditure represents those items not falling into any other heading

     Irrecoverable VAT is charged as a cost to Overheads

i)   Grants payable
     Grants payable are made to third parties in furtherance of the charity's objects. Single or multi-year grants are accounted for when either the
     recipient has a reasonable expectation that they will receive a grant and the trustees have agreed to pay the grant without condition, or the
     recipient has a reasonable expectation that they will receive a grant and that any condition attaching to the grant is outside of the control of
     the charity.

j)   Allocation of support costs
     Resources expended are allocated to a particular activity where the cost relates directly to that activity. However, support cost (the cost of
     overall direction and administration of each activity, comprising the salary and overhead costs of the central function) is apportioned on the
     bases of an estimate, based on staff time, of the amount attributable to each activity.

     Governance costs are the costs associated with the governance arrangements of the Association. These costs are associated with
     constitutional and statutory requirements and include any costs associated with the strategic management of the Association’s activities.
     These costs are allocated to each activity based on staff time.

          Cost of Raising Funds:           9%
          Engagement programmes:           34%
          Education programmes:            28%
          Policy, Partnerships & Impact    12%
          New Grants programme             17%


k) Operating leases
   Where assets are financed by leasing agreement that give rights approximating to ownership ("finance leases"), the assets are treated as if
   they had been purchased outright. The amount capitalised is the present value of the minimum lease payments during the lease term. The
   corresponding leasing commitments are shown as obligations to the lessor.

l)   Tangible fixed assets
     Items of equipment are capitalised where the purchase price exceeds £500. Depreciation costs are allocated to activities on the basis of the
     use of the related assets in those activities. Assets are reviewed for impairment if circumstances indicate their carrying value may exceed their
     net realisable value and value in use.
     Depreciation is provided at rates calculated to write down the cost of each asset to its estimated residual value over its expected useful life.
     The depreciation rates in use are as follows:
        Office equipment                                          Straight line over 5 years
        Computer equipment                                        Straight line over 3 years

m) Listed investments
   Investments are a form of basic financial instrument and are initially recognised at their transaction value and subsequently measured at their
   fair value as at the balance sheet date using the closing quoted market price. Any change in fair value will be recognised in the statement of
   financial activities. Investment gains and losses, whether realised or unrealised, are combined and shown in the heading “net gains/(losses) on
   investments” in the statement of financial activities. The Association does not acquire put options, derivatives or other complex financial
   instruments.

     The Association's Investment Fund is invested in accordance with the Powers of Investment set out in the Schedule to the 1977 Supplemental
     Charter, which requires that at least 15% of the fund must comprise investments in Government and/or fixed interest securities, including
     interest-bearing cash deposits. Council has determined that the primary objective of investment policy should be to maintain the capital value
     of the fund in real terms over the long term.

n) Debtors
   Trade and other debtors are recognised at the settlement amount due after any trade discount offered. Prepayments are valued at the amount
   prepaid net of any trade discounts due.




                                                                                                                                              28
British Association for the Advancement of Science

Notes to the financial statements

For the year ended 31 March 2025

1   Accounting policies (continued)

o) Cash at bank and in hand
   Cash at bank and cash in hand includes cash and short term highly liquid investments with a short maturity of three months or less from the
   date of acquisition or opening of the deposit or similar account. Cash balances exclude any funds held on behalf of service users.

p) Creditors and provisions
   Creditors and provisions are recognised where the Association has a present obligation resulting from a past event that will probably result in
   the transfer of funds to a third party and the amount due to settle the obligation can be measured or estimated reliably. Creditors and
   provisions are normally recognised at their settlement amount after allowing for any trade discounts due.

    The Association only has financial assets and financial liabilities of a kind that qualify as basic financial instruments. Basic financial
    instruments are initially recognised at transaction value and subsequently measured at their settlement value with the exception of bank loans
    which are subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method.

q) Pensions
   The Association operates under an auto enrolment scheme and auto enrols the new employees into the Government's NEST scheme. Pre 1 July
   2014, employees are in an AEGON pension scheme. The Association matches the minimum 1% contribution and pays (on a sliding scale) up to
   two times the contributions made by employees to the schemes which can range between 1% and 5% of gross salary. The pension charge
   recorded in these financial statements is the amount of contributions payable by the Association in the accounting year.



2   Income from donations and legacies
                                                                                             2025                                              2024
                                                     Unrestricted      Restricted            Total    Unrestricted       Restricted            Total
                                                                £               £                £               £                £                £

    Subscriptions and donations                            9,907                -          9,907            5,682                 -          5,682
    Donated services and facilities - office space        74,311                -         74,311           72,428                 -         72,428
    Other income                                          31,720                -         31,720           96,983                 -         96,983

                                                        115,938                 -        115,938          175,093                 -        175,093



3   Income from charitable activities

                                                                                             2025                                              2024
                                                     Unrestricted       Restricted           Total    Unrestricted       Restricted            Total
                                                                £                £               £               £                £                £

    British Science Festival                             40,000          601,404         641,404           34,000         399,354          433,354
    Other engagement programmes                         840,140                -         840,140           75,283       1,166,672        1,241,955

    Sub-total for engagement programmes                 880,140          601,404       1,481,544          109,283       1,566,026        1,675,309

    Education programmes                              1,146,739           45,970       1,192,709          216,581       1,017,080        1,233,661
    Policy, Partnerships & Impact                       258,939                -         258,939          149,606               -          149,606
    Grants Programme                                          -        3,365,268       3,365,268                -       1,504,908        1,504,908

    Total income from charitable activities           2,285,818        4,012,641       6,298,460          475,470       4,088,014        4,563,484



4   Income from investments

                                                                                             2025                                              2024
                                                     Unrestricted       Restricted           Total    Unrestricted       Restricted            Total
                                                                £                £               £               £                £                £

    Dividends                                             16,555                -         16,555           17,239                 -         17,239
    Interest                                              16,121                -         16,121           17,437                 -         17,437

                                                         32,676                 -         32,676           34,676                 -         34,676




                                                                                                                                          29
British Association for the Advancement of Science

Notes to the financial statements

For the year ended 31 March 2025

5a Analysis of expenditure (current year)

                                                                                      Charitable activities
                                                                                                   Policy,        Regions,
                                           Cost of     Engagement        Education        Partnerships &      branches and           Grants   Governance                         2025
                                     raising funds     programmes     programmes                  Impact           sections     Programme           costs   Support costs        Total   2024 Total
                                                 £               £                £                      £                £               £             £               £            £           £

   Staff costs (Note 8)                     120,669        483,889        386,311               159,162                  -          241,668       24,960        255,984     1 ,672,642   1,558,530
   Direct costs                               2,544        573,591        478,592               120,001              6,960       3, 025,360            -              -     4 ,207,048   2,627,871
   Investment managers' fees                      -              -              -                     -                  -                -            -         11,356         11,356      10,466
   Office costs                                   -              -              -                     -                  -                -        1,657        295,854        297,510     282,566
   Depreciation and disposals                     -              -              -                     -                  -                -            -         22,855         22,855      15,474
   Legal and professional                         -              -              -                     -                  -                -            -         25,180         25,180      24,811
   Irrecoverable VAT                              -              -              -                     -                  -                -            -         69,904         69,904     126,917
   Office service charge                          -              -              -                     -                  -                -            -        152,951        152,951     123,813
   Insurance                                      -              -              -                     -                  -                -            -         15,511         15,511      14,454
   Marketing and PR                               -              -              -                     -                  -                -            -          2,438          2,438      11,860

                                            123,213      1,057,479        864,903                279,163             6,960       3,267,028        26,617        852,033     6,477,396    4,796,762

    Support costs                            75,376        290,334        241,309                 99,420                 -         145,594             -       (852,033)            -            -

   Governance costs                           2,355          9,070          7,538                  3,106                 -           4,548      (26,617)               -            -


   Total expenditure 2025             200,943.28      1,356,882.83   1,113,750.18           381,689.07           6,960.34     3,417,170.32             -               -    6,477,396    4,796,762




                                                                                                                                                                                          30
British Association for the Advancement of Science

Notes to the financial statements

For the year ended 31 March 2025

5b Analysis of expenditure (prior year)

                                                                                     Charitable activities
                                                                                                  Policy,        Regions,
                                      Cost of raising   Engagement      Education        Partnerships &      branches and         Grants   Governance                        2024
                                               funds    programmes   programmes                  Impact           sections   Programme           costs   Support costs       Total
                                                    £            £               £                      £                £             £             £               £           £

    Staff costs (Note 8)                      83,383       506,828       332,839                124,573                 -      213,090         27,990        269,827     1,558,530
    Direct costs                               3,301       890,737       491,209                 96,423             8,843    1,137,358              -              -     2,627,871
    Investment managers' fees                      -             -             -                      -                 -            -              -         10,466        10,466
    Office costs                                   -             -             -                      -                 -            -          1,784        280,782       282,566
    Depreciation and disposals                     -             -             -                      -                 -            -              -         15,474        15,474
    Legal and professional                         -             -             -                      -                 -            -              -         24,811        24,811
    Irrecoverable VAT                              -             -             -                      -                 -            -              -        126,917       126,917
    Office service charge                          -             -             -                      -                 -            -              -        123,813       123,813
    Insurance                                      -             -             -                      -                 -            -              -         14,454        14,454
    Marketing and PR                               -             -             -                      -                 -            -              -         11,860        11,860

                                              86,684     1,397,565       824,048                220,996             8,843     1,350,448        29,774        878,404     4,796,762

    Support costs                             58,097       353,134       231,907                 86,796                 -      148,471              -       (878,404)            -

    Governance costs                           1,969        11,969         7,860                  2,942                 -         5,032      (29,774)               -


    Total expenditure 2024                  146,750      1,762,668    1,063,815                310,734             8,843     1,503,951              -               -    4,796,762




                                                                                                                                                                            31
British Association for the Advancement of Science

Notes to the financial statements

For the year ended 31 March 2025

6     Grant making

                                                                                                          2025              2024
                                                                                                             £                 £
      Cost
      Wellcome Trust grants                                                                          2,735,017            845,754
      Engagement Grants                                                                                162,352            292,816
      Education Grants                                                                                  86,950             87,271

      At the end of the year                                                                        2,984,319        1,225,842




7     Net income / (expenditure) for the period

      This is stated after charging :


                                                                                                          2025              2024
                                                                                                             £                 £

      Depreciation                                                                                     22,855             15,474
      Operating lease rentals:
         Property                                                                                      78,640             51,385
      Auditors' remuneration (excluding VAT):
         Audit                                                                                         15,170             14,450

8     Analysis of staff costs, trustee remuneration and expenses, and the cost of key management personnel


      Staff costs were as follows:

                                                                                                          2025              2024
                                                                                                             £                 £

      Salaries and wages                                                                            1,461,843         1,357,988
      Social security costs                                                                           147,741           138,343
      Employer’s contribution to defined contribution pension schemes                                  63,058            62,199

                                                                                                    1,672,642         1,558,530



      The following number of employees received employee benefits (excluding employer pension costs) during the period
      between:


                                                                                                          2025              2024
                                                                                                           No.               No.

      £60,000 - £69,999                                                                                      1                    1
      £70,000 - £79,999                                                                                      2                    1
      £80,000 - £89,999                                                                                      -                    -


      The total employee benefits including pension contributions of the key management personnel were £258,921 (2024:
      £236,187).
      The Council members were not paid nor received any other benefits from employment with the Association in the year (2024:
      £nil). No Council member received payment for professional or other services supplied to the Association (2024: £nil).

      Council members' expenses represent the payment or reimbursement of travel and subsistence costs totalling £918 (2024:
      £925) incurred by 3 (2024: 4) members relating to attendance at Council meetings.




                                                                                                                               32
British Association for the Advancement of Science

Notes to the financial statements

For the year ended 31 March 2025

9     Staff numbers


      The average number of employees (head count based on number of staff employed) during the period was as follows:




                                                                                                               2025             2024
                                                                                                                No.              No.

      Fundraising, marketing and public relations                                                                5.8             5.7
      Engagement programmes                                                                                      8.1             8.8
      Educational programmes                                                                                     6.9             6.8
      Policy, Partnerships & Impact                                                                              5.0             6.0
      Ideas Fund                                                                                                 3.6             3.4
      Support and Governance                                                                                     8.6             6.6

                                                                                                                38.0            37.3



10    Related party transactions

      There are no related party transactions to disclose for 2025 (2024: none).

      There are no donations from related parties which are outside the normal course of business and no restricted donations
      from related parties.



11    Taxation

      The charity is exempt from corporation tax as all its income is charitable and is applied for charitable purposes.


12    Tangible fixed assets
                                                                                     Fixtures and         Computer
                                                                                          fittings       equipment              Total
                                                                                                 £               £                 £
      Cost
      At the start of the year                                                            30,576             46,223         76,799
      Additions in year                                                                         -            38,948         38,948
      Disposals in year                                                                   (7,900)           (12,352)       (20,252)

      At the end of the year                                                              22,676             72,819        95,495


      Depreciation
      At the start of the year                                                            29,423              34,185        63,608
      Charge for the year                                                                     600             22,255        22,855
      Eliminated on disposal                                                              (7,900)           (12,352)             -

      At the end of the year                                                              22,123             44,088         66,211
      Net book value
      At the end of the year                                                                  553            28,731         29,284

      At the start of the Year                                                              1,153            12,038         13,191

      All of the above assets are used for charitable purposes.




                                                                                                                                 33
British Association for the Advancement of Science

Notes to the financial statements

For the year ended 31 March 2025

13    Listed investments

                                                                 2025         2024
                                                                    £            £

      Fair value at the start of the year                   1,347,127    1,228,408
      Additions at cost                                       556,132      395,182
      Disposal proceeds                                      (567,573)   (360,218)
      Net (loss)/gain on change in fair value                  50,087       83,755
                                                            1,385,773    1,347,127

      Cash held by investment broker pending reinvestment      21,769        7,400


      Fair value at the end of the year                     1,407,542    1,354,528


      Historic cost at the end of the year                  1,199,057    1,145,475


      Investments comprise:

                                                                 2025         2024
                                                                    £            £

      Shares listed on the London Stock Exchange            1,385,773    1,347,127
      Cash                                                     21,769        7,400

                                                            1,407,542    1,354,528



14    Debtors



                                                                 2025         2024
                                                                    £            £

      Trade debtors                                           500,833      443,734
      Other debtors                                                 2          915
      Prepayments                                              57,639       74,159
      Accrued income                                        2,232,983    1,163,409

                                                            2,791,457    1,682,216



15    Creditors: amounts falling due within one year



                                                                 2025         2024
                                                                    £            £

      Trade creditors                                         142,916      144,139
      Taxation and social security                            193,620       72,474
      Other creditors                                          80,386       61,487
      Accruals                                                139,442      188,037
      Grant accruals                                        1,096,204      677,285
      Deferred income                                         627,550      760,707

                                                            2,280,118    1,904,128




                                                                               34
British Association for the Advancement of Science

Notes to the financial statements

For the year ended 31 March 2025

16    Deferred income

      Deferred income comprises both fees received in advance of the delivery of the services and grants received for future
      financial periods.


                                                                                                             2025              2024
                                                                                                                £                 £

      Balance at the beginning of the period                                                              760,707          299,250
      Amount released to income in the period                                                           (760,707)         (299,250)
      Amount deferred in the period                                                                       627,550          760,707

      Balance at the end of the period                                                                   627,550           760,707



17    Creditors: amounts falling due after one year

                                                                                                             2025              2024
                                                                                                                £                 £


      Grant Commitments                                                                                  916,402                    -


                                                                                                         916,402                    -


      At 31 March 2025, the charity had made grant commitments for which a constructive obligation exists and the payment is
      due beyond one year. These relate to grants awarded in the year to projects extending over multiple years. Amount due
      within two years are £556,795 (2024: £nil). Amount due between two and three years is £359,607 (2024: £nil).



18a   Analysis of net assets between funds (current year)

                                                                     General        Designated          Restricted       2025 Total
                                                                          £                  £                   £               £

      Tangible fixed assets                                          29,284                  -                 -             29,284
      Investments                                                   903,657            503,885                 -          1,407,542
      Long Term Liabilities                                               -                  -         (916,402)           (916,402)
      Net current assets                                                  -            563,573         1,055,517          1,619,090

      Net assets at the end of the year                             932,941         1,067,458            139,115         2,139,514



18b   Analysis of net assets between funds (prior period)

                                                                     General        Designated          Restricted       2024 Total
                                                                          £                  £                   £               £

      Tangible fixed assets                                           13,191                 -                 -             13,191
      Investments                                                    900,128           454,399                 -          1,354,527
      Long Term Liabilities                                                -                 -                 -                  -
      Net current assets                                                   -           500,462           251,567            752,029

      Net assets at the end of the period                           913,319           954,861            251,567         2,119,748


      The charity has designated a portion of its unrestricted funds based on a worst-case scenario approach. This assumes that
      certain risks could materialise simultaneously, requiring the charity to draw down on these funds.

      In reality, the likelihood of such events occurring at the same time is low. As such, this designation does not reflect
      forecasted financial performance, but represents a conservative measure to safeguard against risk and support the charity’s
      financial resilience.




                                                                                                                                  35
British Association for the Advancement of Science

Notes to the financial statements

For the year ended 31 March 2025


19a   Movements in funds (current year)
                                                                    Incoming      Outgoing
                                               At 31 March        resources &   resources &                At 31 March
                                                      2024              gains        losses    Transfers          2025
                                                         £                  £             £            £             £

      Restricted funds:
      Engagement programmes
          British Science Festival                          -        601,404      (593,754)      (7,650)            -
          Other engagement programmes                       -              -              -            -            -
      Education programmes                             79,356         45,970      (107,210)            -       18,116
      Policy, Partnerships & Impact                         -              -              -            -            -
      Grants programme                                148,981      3,365,268    (3,417,170)            -       97,079
      Sections and regions                             23,230              -        (6,960)       7,650        23,920

      Total restricted funds                         251,567      4,012,642     (4,125,094)           -      139,115


      Unrestricted funds:
      Designated funds:
      Engagement programmes
          British Science Festival                          -         40,000        (18,678)    (11,322)       10,000
          Other engagement programmes                 100,000        840,140      (744,451)      14,312       210,000
      Education programmes                            209,000      1,146,739    (1,006,540)    (156,602)      192,597
      Policy, Partnerships & Impact                   130,000        258,939      (381,689)     131,750       139,000
      Contingency for wind-down costs                 500,000              -               -           -      500,000
      Innovation Fund                                  15,861              -               -           -       15,861

      Total designated funds                          954,861      2,285,818    (2,151,359)     (21,862)    1,067,458

      General funds                                   913,320       198,701       (200,943)      21,862       932,940


      Total unrestricted funds                   1,868,181        2,484,519     (2,352,302)            -    2,000,398

      Total funds                               2,119,748         6,497,161     (6,477,396)            -    2,139,513



19b   Movements in funds (prior period)
                                                                    Incoming      Outgoing
                                                     At 1 April   resources &   resources &                At 31 March
                                                         2023           gains        losses    Transfers          2024
                                                             £              £             £            £             £
      Restricted funds:
      Engagement programmes
          British Science Festival                          -        399,354      (392,054)      (7,300)            -
          Other engagement programmes                       -      1,166,672    (1,166,672)            -            -
      Education programmes                             69,403      1,017,080    (1,007,127)            -       79,356
      Policy, Partnerships & Impact                         -              -              -            -            -
      Grants programme                                148,024      1,504,908    (1,503,951)            -      148,981
      Sections and regions                             20,623              -        (6,993)       9,600        23,230

      Total restricted funds                         238,049      4,088,014     (4,076,797)       2,300      251,567


      Unrestricted funds:
      Designated funds:
      Engagement programmes
          British Science Festival                    100,828        34,000       (188,713)      53,885
          Other engagement programmes                  90,000        75,283         (7,929)     (57,354)      100,000
      Education programmes                            120,001       303,559        (56,689)    (157,871)      209,000
      Policy, Partnerships & Impact                   205,000       149,606       (310,734)      86,128       130,000
      Contingency for wind-down costs                 500,000             -               -            -      500,000
      Innovation Fund                                  15,861             -               -            -       15,861

      Total designated funds                     1,031,690          562,449       (564,065)     (75,212)      954,861

      General funds                                   790,613       206,545       (156,750)      72,912       913,320

      Total unrestricted funds                   1,822,303          768,994       (720,815)      (2,300)    1,868,181

      Total funds                               2,060,352         4,857,008     (4,797,612)            -    2,119,748



                                                                                                                  36
British Association for the Advancement of Science

Notes to the financial statements

For the year ended 31 March 2025

20    Movements in funds - descriptions

      Purposes of restricted funds

      British Science Festival
      These are funds received specifically to deliver the British Science Festival and have been fully spent in the year.


      Grants Programme
      These are funds received directly to deliver the Ideas Fund programme. At the year end some grant funding had not been
      fully spent and has been carried forward.

      Education
      These are funds received predominantly to deliver work relating to Educational programmes including CREST Awards. At the
      year end some grant funding from 1851 remains unspent, which is to be spent in 2025/26.

      Sections
      Sections raise their own funds as well as receive contributions from the engagement programmes. The majority of the
      balances are restricted funding from the British Science Festival.


      Purposes of designated funds

      Engagement
      These are funds set aside by management in order to support the activities of the Engagement team in the coming financial
      year if required.

      Education
      These are funds set aside by management in order to support the activities of the Education Team in the coming financial
      year if required. There are also funds designated towards CREST Digital Development, CREST Kit Boxes and the continuing
      development of the CREST Website


      Policy, Partnerships & Impact
      These are funds set aside by management in order to support the activities of the PPI Team in the coming financial year if
      required.

      Contingency for wind-down costs
      We currently hold £500,000 in designated reserves as a contingency in the case of wind down.


      Innovation Fund
      The availability of this fund encourages our staff to develop and implement ideas that contribute to our strategic goals
      during the year.


      Transfers between funds
      Transfers have been made between funds to enable the right reserves to be available in the right areas as described above.




                                                                                                                                   37
British Association for the Advancement of Science

Notes to the financial statements

For the year ended 31 March 2025

21    Reconciliation of net income / (expenditure) to net cash flow from operating activities

                                                                                                             2025                 2024
                                                                                                                £                    £

      Net income / (expenditure) for the reporting period                                                 19,765                59,396
      (as per the statement of financial activities)
      Depreciation charges                                                                                22,855                15,474
      (Profit)/loss on the disposal of fixed assets                                                             -                     -
      (Gains)/losses on investments                                                                      (50,087)              (83,755)
      Dividends, interest and rent from investments                                                      (32,676)              (34,676)
      (Increase)/decrease in debtors                                                                  (1,109,241)               71,897
      Increase/(decrease) in creditors                                                                 1,292,392          (730,459)

      Net cash provided by / (used in) operating activities                                              143,008          (702,122)



22    Analysis of cash and cash equivalents


                                                                                   At 31 March                          At 31 March
                                                                                          2024         Cash flows              2025
                                                                                             £                  £                 £

      Cash at bank and in hand                                                         973,942          (133,809)         1,107,751
      Cash awaiting investment                                                           7,400            14,369             21,769

      Total cash and cash equivalents                                                 981,342           (119,440)        1,129,520



23    Operating lease commitments

      The charity's total future minimum lease payments under non-cancellable operating leases is as follows for each of the
      following periods.
                                                                                                               Property


                                                                                                             2025                 2024
                                                                                                                £                    £

      Less than 1 year                                                                                    81,417                69,115
      1 - 5 Years                                                                                        325,668               276,460
      Over 5 years                                                                                     1,058,420               967,610

                                                                                                       1,465,505          1,313,185


      The commitment relates to the service charge due under the Wellcome Wolfson Building lease. The term of the lease is for 40
      years from 29 September 2003 increasing by inflation each year.




                                                                                                                                   38
British Association for the Advancement of Science

Notes to the financial statements

For the year ended 31 March 2025

24    Detail of branches, and sections and regions restricted funds


                                                             Incoming       Outgoing
                                        At 31 March       resources &     resources &               At 31 March
                                               2024             gains          losses   Transfers         2025
Sections and regions
Agriculture & Food                              845                   -         (101)         450        1,194
Anthropology                                    121                   -         (347)         450          224
Biological Sciences                             323                   -       (1,015)         693            -
Chemistry                                     3,205                   -         (101)     (1,293)        1,811
Economics                                     2,196                   -         (760)         450        1,886
Education                                     1,739                   -             -         450        2,189
Engineering                                   3,099                   -         (500)         450        3,049
General                                         881                   -         (101)         450        1,230
Geography                                     2,568                   -         (203)         450        2,815
Geology                                       1,457                   -             -         450        1,907
History of Science                              547                   -             -         450          997
Mathematics                                     936                   -         (990)         450          396
Medical Sciences                              1,245                   -         (401)         450        1,294
Physics                                         469                   -         (101)         450          818
Psychology                                    2,223                   -       (1,332)         450        1,341
Science & The Arts                              937                   -       (1,008)       1,950        1,880
Sociology                                       439                   -             -         450          889


Total sections and regions
restricted funds                            23,230                    -       (6,960)      7,650        23,920




                                                                                                             39
