Equality, Diversity and Inclusion
Report (2024)
Goldsmiths, University of London



Table of Contents
   Introduction .................................................................................................................. 2

   Section 1: Key Developments ..................................................................................... 3

   Section 2: About our Students .................................................................................... 6

   Section 3: About our staff .......................................................................................... 13

   Section 4: Progress on Equality Objectives ............................................................. 19




Equality, Diversity, and Inclusion Report (2024)
Dinah Amuah and Waqar Ali                                                                                                Page 1 of 46
Introduction
Equity and inclusion are values that have always been very important to Goldsmiths and are
a central element of our culture. Goldsmiths’ academic portfolio attracts people with a
commitment to equality, and many of our students, staff and alumni are at the forefront of
social justice movements.

Goldsmiths under the provisions of the Equality Act (2010) publishes this annual report as
part of the Public Sector Equality Duty. This report outlines progress against our previous
Equality, Diversity and Inclusion Objectives and Action Plan, and documents progress
against these objectives. It also includes student and staff equalities data for the 2023-24
academic year.

Sector data for students which is usually included for comparative analysis is unavailable
from Advance HE and so the data presented is from Goldsmiths, University of London, only.

In this report and subsequent reports, the data previously titled ‘Gender’ is referred to as
‘Sex’ so as to be in line with the Equality Act 2010. This has also been changed to maintain
comparability between our institutional report and the national sector report.
We are also no longer using the term Black, Asian or minority ethnic (BAME), rather People
of Colour (POE) to reflect our belief that no individual or group is a minority on account of
their ethnicity and our advocacy for racial justice and equality.
Looking ahead, the format for our annual reports will be changing. Starting with our 2024-25
report, rather than detail progress via key objectives we will provide an overview of work that
has been done and is ongoing across Goldsmiths, as part of our operational priorities in line
with the Goldsmiths Strategy 2033, under the Staff Engagement and Wellbeing pillar. This
also incorporates our new strategic action plan: Goldsmiths Engagement Plan (2024-27).




                                                                                      Page 2 of 46
Equality, Diversity, and Inclusion Report (2024)
Dinah Amuah and Waqar Ali
Section 1: Key Developments
Race Justice at Goldsmiths
Race Justice Strategy Board
The Goldsmiths Race Justice Strategy Board was formed in September 2021 and is co-
chaired by the Warden, Professor Frances Corner and an independent co-chair Natalia Nana
Lester-Bush, with membership drawn from across the College’s academic schools,
professional services team, Goldsmiths Students Union, recognised Trade Unions UNISON
and UCU and representatives from Goldsmiths Race Equality Group (GREG) and
Goldsmiths Anti-Racism Action (GARA).

Embedding Anti-Racism in Institutional Change
The Race Justice Strategic Framework draws together the detail of the Insider Outsider
Report and Identity and Impact Report, solidifying the case for racial justice strategy at
Goldsmiths and providing guiding principles for colleagues to take anti-racist action. The
Race Justice Strategy was developed after the identification of systemic and interpersonal
drivers of discrimination Insider Outsider Report, Identity and Impact Report. These drivers of
discrimination have now been reframed as objectives with enabling deliverables to ensure
they are directly addressed.

Through its discussions and recommendations, the Board works to ensure that the College is
advancing race equality and implementing and evaluating the Race Justice Strategy.

Goldsmiths’ Race Justice Strategy is a bold and transformative framework designed to drive
systemic change and embed anti-racism across the College. Grounded in our institutional
values and shaped by the lived experiences of our community, the strategy provides a clear
roadmap for dismantling racial inequities and fostering an environment where all students
and staff can thrive.

At its core, the strategy is built on key commitments, including addressing racial disparities in
student outcomes, ensuring equitable recruitment and career progression for staff, and
embedding anti-racist principles into our teaching, research, and governance structures. The
Race Justice Strategy Board (RJSB) continues to play a crucial role in driving this work
forward, ensuring accountability at the highest levels while equipping departments and teams
with the tools to translate strategic aims into meaningful action.

Race Justice Strategy
A defining strength of the Race Justice Strategy is its emphasis on collaboration and
transparency. Over the past year, we have actively engaged with students, staff, and external
partners to co-develop solutions that reflect the needs and aspirations of our community. This
has included the establishment of dedicated workstreams focusing on key areas such as
curriculum reform, decolonisation, and inclusive leadership. By integrating race equity into
the fabric of institutional transformation, we are ensuring that this work is not a standalone
initiative but a fundamental pillar of Goldsmiths’ future.

Currently work is being done by the newly appointed Race Justice Projects Officer, who took
up the role in September 2023, to support workstream leads in carrying out actions for this

                                                                                       Page 3 of 46
Equality, Diversity, and Inclusion Report (2024)
Dinah Amuah and Waqar Ali
academic year. This includes regular meetings with leads and the development of guidance
for workstream meetings and reporting procedures.

As a result of the Transformation Programme, the Race Justice Projects Officer has
undertaken a comprehensive project to redesign strategy implementation. This project,
“Reimagining the Workstreams” has led to the development of eight distinct focus areas:

     1. Access and Participation
     2. Staff Engagement
     3. Student Engagement
     4. Decolonised Praxis
     5. Researcher Outcomes
     6. Leadership
     7. Civic Engagement
     8. International Partnerships

The new focus area structure will be implemented from September 2024 and includes the
implementation of a tracker document which documents the progress of actions under each
focus area on a quarterly basis.

This academic year has also seen several more dedicated Q&A sessions between the GREG
network and the Warden, with a view to extend this opportunity to other networks in the next
academic year.

Race Equality Charter

Goldsmiths remains steadfast in its commitment to becoming an anti-racist institution and
advancing racial justice across all aspects of college life.

A key milestone in this journey has been the REC survey, which provided valuable insights
into the lived experiences of our students. The data gathered has shaped a comprehensive
analysis, identifying key themes that will guide our institutional response. Building on this
foundation, we are deepening our engagement through focus groups and listening sessions,
creating space for honest conversations that will inform a reflective and responsive approach
to race equity.

The development of our REC Action Plan will be a truly collaborative effort, led by the REC
Self-Assessment Team (SAT) together with the Race Equality Charter Officer and supported
by the Race Justice Projects Officer. This plan will serve as a roadmap for sustainable
change, aligning with broader institutional strategies such as our Race Justice Strategy and
the work of the Race Justice Strategy Board (RJSB). We are also strengthening partnerships
with institutions that have successfully achieved REC Bronze and Silver awards, drawing on
best practices while shaping a distinctive approach that reflects Goldsmiths’ unique context
and ambitions.

Institutional leadership plays a pivotal role in driving this work forward. Our REC submission
will be reviewed by key governance groups, including the Senior Management Team (SMT),
the People and Organisational Development Equalities Committee (PODEC), and

                                                                                      Page 4 of 46
Equality, Diversity, and Inclusion Report (2024)
Dinah Amuah and Waqar Ali
Goldsmiths Race Equality Group (GREG). This high-level engagement ensures that race
equity remains a strategic priority, backed by dedicated resources and leadership
commitment that extends well beyond the REC submission itself.

Looking ahead, we recognise that achieving the REC Bronze Award is not the final goal but
an important milestone in our broader race equality journey. Sustained action, accountability,
and investment will be critical in driving meaningful and lasting progress. With our REC
submission on track for the March 2024 deadline, we see this as a key step in our long-term
commitment to race equity.

As we move forward, Goldsmiths will continue working in partnership with students, staff, and
external networks to ensure that race equality is not just an aspiration, but an embedded
reality reflected in our structures, culture, and everyday practices.

Anti-Racism Training
Anti-Racism Training was piloted this year and consisted of several listening events and
three-day workshops for members of Goldsmiths Leadership Group. A thorough evaluation
will be conducted and recommendations implemented for the 2024-25 academic year.

The Race Justice Strategy Board Away Day provided an opportunity for detailed discussions
on Race Justice, including knowledge sharing and best practice. This Away Day model will be
followed in subsequent years with the next one planned for May 2025.

Looking ahead, the success of the Race Justice Strategy will depend on continued leadership
accountability, meaningful engagement with minoritised communities, and sustained
investment in anti-racist initiatives. Goldsmiths remains resolute in embedding race justice
into every aspect of institutional life, driving forward a vision for a truly inclusive and equitable
university.



Disability Equality
Since the last report on Disability Equality, The Student Disability Team has continued to
ensure simplified registration and access to reasonable adjustments. Students can now email
evidence of their disability to the Disability and Inclusion Service who will register them on the
basis of this evidence and allocate a set of Universal Reasonable Adjustments (please find
details here). Those students who will need additional support/ adjustments are invited for an
appointment with an adviser who can draw out an individual plan of support/adjustments
(called a Reasonable Adjustments Support Agreement or RASA) which is shared with the
relevant colleagues in charge of implementing the support/adjustments. This has freed some
capacity in the Disability and Inclusion Service to run information sessions about the extra
disability funding (Disabled Students Allowance) and other targeted welcoming activities in
the first few weeks of terms. When first implemented, this change in procedure saw the
disability disclosure rates amongst students rise to 33% of the total student population (far
above the national average in higher Education which currently stands at 19%).




                                                                                           Page 5 of 46
Equality, Diversity, and Inclusion Report (2024)
Dinah Amuah and Waqar Ali
Recent additions to training courses around disability awareness continue to be offered to
staff such as; "What is Neurodiversity?” and “Neurodiversity and the Line Manager: Part 1
and 2” which complemented training sessions such as Support Disabled Students at
Goldsmiths, Mental Health Awareness, Supporting Staff to Support Students, and general
Disability Awareness.

Disability Confident Scheme
In August 2022 Goldsmiths renewed its accreditation with the Disability Confident Employer
Scheme and retains its status as a Disability Confident Employer. Goldsmiths offered
‘Disability Equality in the Workplace’ training to all members of staff within the Human
Resources directorate during 2021 and this training became available to all staff in 2022.
Goldsmiths continues to apply a guaranteed interview scheme for disabled applicants who
meet essential criteria, ensuring that the recruitment process is open and accessible to all.



Gender Equality

Athena Swan
Goldsmiths was awarded the Bronze ‘Athena SWAN’ award in March 2020. The College is
continuing its work towards submitting a new application in the 2025-26 academic year.
Since receiving this award, Goldsmiths has continued to advance its commitment to gender
equality and in March 2022, both the Computing and Psychology departments successfully
obtained a bronze award.

As part of our Athena SWAN action plan we have also launched guidance for Managers on
inclusive approaches to Performance and Development Review (PDR) and have produced a
successful inclusive recruitment and selection training course.



LGBTQ+ Equality

Stonewall Workplace Equality Index
In September 2022 Goldsmiths submitted a voluntary application for the ‘Stonewall
Workplace Equality Index’ (WEI), the UK’s leading benchmark tool for LGBT inclusion in the
workplace. Goldsmiths was awarded a Silver Award in February 2023 in recognition of the
College’s continuous work to improve LGBTQ+ equality and inclusion across its community.
The Award was given based on our ability to provide evidence that was reviewed against a
set of criteria, as well as feedback from staff collected in an anonymous and confidential
online survey.

Section 2: About our Students
This section provides an overview of our student profile for 2023-24 by each of the protected
characteristics outlined in the Equality Act 2010. Data refers to students enrolled during
2023-24.


                                                                                      Page 6 of 46
Equality, Diversity, and Inclusion Report (2024)
Dinah Amuah and Waqar Ali
Sector benchmarks are based on the HE student profile as outlined in Advance HE’s Equality
in Higher Education statistical report. The student data due to be published and used for
comparison was unavailable and therefore, information presented in this section will be for
internal student data only.

For reference, in comparison to the UK HE sector, last academic year Goldsmiths attracted
more female students (68.9% compared to 57.3% nationally), disabled students (26%
compared to 15.9% nationally), Black, Asian and other ethnic students (51% compared to
27% nationally) and LGBTQ+ students (19% compared to 11.9% nationally).

Data presented is as at 31st August 2024




Age
 40%
                                 36%
 35%
 30%            27%
 25%
 20%                                               18%

 15%
                                                           11%
 10%
                                                                    5%
   5%                                                                       2%       1%
   0%
             Under 21           21-24              25-29   30-39   40-49   50-59   60 years
                                                                                   and over


   Compared to last academic year, there has been an increase in the number of students
   aged 21-49 who enrolled at Goldsmiths. The largest increase is in students aged 21-24 by
   9 percentage points (pp).




                                                                                              Page 7 of 46
Equality, Diversity, and Inclusion Report (2024)
Dinah Amuah and Waqar Ali
Disability (summarised)


            Yes                                    22%




 Not known                 3%




             No                                                                    75%


                  0%          10%          20%       30%   40%   50%   60%   70%   80%



   The number of students who have declared having a disability this academic year have
   not differed greatly in comparison to last academic year (26%). The difference could be
   attributed to a lower declaration rate this year.




                                                                                         Page 8 of 46
Equality, Diversity, and Inclusion Report (2024)
Dinah Amuah and Waqar Ali
    Disability (breakdown)

   Two or more impairments and/or disabling
                                                               1%
             medical conditions

   Social/communication conditions such as a
                                                               1%
    speech and language impairment or an…

                                          Prefer not to say    2%


                                                   Not known   1%

    No known impairment, health condition or
                                                                                              75%
              learning difference

 Long-term illness or health condition such as
                                                               1%
    cancer, HIV, diabetes, chronic heart…

           Learning difference such as dyslexia,
                                                                    7%
                   dyspraxia or AD(H)D

    Development condition that you have had
                                                               0%
      since childhood which affects motor,…

           D/deaf or have a hearing impairment                 0%

             Blind or a serious visual impairment
                                                               0%
                   uncorrected by glasses

   An impairment, health condition or learning
                                                               1%
             difference not listed

A physical impairment or mobility issues, such
                                                               0%
     as difficulty using arms or using a…

     A mental health condition, such as
                                                                    9%
depression, schizophrenia or anxiety disorder


    * Social/communication conditions such as a speech and language impairment or an
      autistic spectrum condition

    * Long-term illness or health condition such as cancer, HIV, diabetes, chronic heart
      disease, or epilepsy

    * Development condition that you have had since childhood which affects motor,
      cognitive, social and emotional skills, and speech and language



                                                                                           Page 9 of 46
    Equality, Diversity, and Inclusion Report (2024)
    Dinah Amuah and Waqar Ali
*A physical impairment or mobility issues, such as difficulty using arms or using a
 wheelchair or crutches

*A mental health condition, such as depression, schizophrenia or anxiety disorder

Note: All figures presented as 0% ranged between 0.01% 0.97%.

Sex
                                              0.5%




                            30.8%
                                                                      Female
                                                                      Male
                                                                      Other
                                                     68.7%




The number of students who identify as either Male, Female, or Other have increased
minimally in comparison to last academic year’s declarations. Goldsmiths continues to have
a higher proportion of female students by more than double that of male students.


Gender Identity

                                            2.9%
                                                     4.1%




                                                              No
                                                              Prefer not to say
                                                              Yes


                               92.9%




                                                                                      Page 10 of 46
Equality, Diversity, and Inclusion Report (2024)
Dinah Amuah and Waqar Ali
   There has been a greater declaration by students of their gender identity compared to last
   academic year (88.7%). 2.9% of students disclosed that they identify with a gender
   different from that assigned at birth, similar to last academic year

   Data was unavailable for 0.01% of students.



Ethnicity


                                                   White - Irish        1%

                     White - Gypsy or Irish Traveller               0%

     White - English, Scottish, Welsh, Northern…                                                                  30%

                                         Prefer not to say                   3%

                                                    Not known       0%

      Mixed or multiple ethnic groups - White or…                       1%

      Mixed or multiple ethnic groups - White or…                       1%

      Mixed or multiple ethnic groups - White or…                        2%

          Black - Caribbean or Caribbean British                         3%

                    Black - African or African British                             7%

              Asian - Pakistani or Pakistani British                     2%

                      Asian - Indian or Indian British                        4%

                Asian - Chinese or Chinese British                                                 17%

    Asian - Bangladeshi or Bangladeshi British                                    5%

                                                          Arab          2%

                        Any other White background                                     8%

Any other Mixed or Multiple ethnic background                            3%

                        Any other ethnic background                      2%

                         Any other Black background                     1%

                         Any other Asian background                               6%

                               African or African British           0%

                                                                   0%        5%        10%   15%   20%   25%   30%    35%


                                                                                                                Page 11 of 46
Equality, Diversity, and Inclusion Report (2024)
Dinah Amuah and Waqar Ali
 * White - English, Scottish, Welsh, Northern Irish or British

 * Mixed or multiple ethnic groups - White or White British and Asian or Asian British

 * Mixed or multiple ethnic groups - White or White British and Black African or Black
  African British

 * Mixed or multiple ethnic groups - White or White British and Black Caribbean or
   Black Caribbean British

 The number of students who identify as non-White at Goldsmiths have increased by 14
 percentage points in comparison to last academic year (51%). There was also a greater
 number of students who disclosed information for this academic year, which could account for
 the large increase in non-White figures.

 Note: All figures presented as 0% had less minimal responses that equalled less
       than 1%.

          3.14% of students did not declare their ethnicity and 0.18% of students’ information
          was ‘Not known’.



 Religion
50%
                                                                               46%
45%
40%
35%
30%
25%
20%
                                       16%
                                                                      14%
15%                                                                                                12%
10%         6%
5%                        2%                         2%
                                                             1%                           0%                    1%
0%
       Any other Buddhist Christian                 Hindu   Jewish   Muslim     No       Not      Prefer       Sikh
        religion                                                              religion available not to say
        or belief




 The picture of the religious profile of students at Goldsmiths generally remains unchanged.

 The College’s largest religious group remains to be ‘Christian’, followed by ‘Muslim’.


                                                                                                         Page 12 of 46
 Equality, Diversity, and Inclusion Report (2024)
 Dinah Amuah and Waqar Ali
Sexual Orientation


                                                   12%
                            20%
                                                         5%
                                                              Bisexual
            3%
                                                              Gay or lesbian
                                                              Heterosexual or straight
                                                              Other sexual orientation
                                                              Prefer not to say

                                               61%




  The picture of the sexual orientation of students at Goldsmiths also generally remains
  Unchanged from last academic year.

  The College’s largest group remains as ‘Heterosexual or straight’. Figures for ‘Bisexual’
  and ‘Gay or lesbian’ remain the same as last academic year.




Section 3: About our staff
This section provides an overview of our staff profile from 2023-24 by protected characteristics
outlined in the Equality Act 2010. Sector benchmarks are based on the HE staff profile, as
outlined in Advance HE’s Equality in Higher Education: Statistic Report 2024.

Data used in this report consists of all Goldsmiths staff (excluding hourly paid staff) with an
active position between September 2023 to August 2024.

Disclosure rates: The data provided relates to staff who have disclosed details on the
employee self-service system ‘Business World’.




                                                                                         Page 13 of 46
Equality, Diversity, and Inclusion Report (2024)
Dinah Amuah and Waqar Ali
Age

                                26.5%                 25.8%
                                                                             22.5%



                                                                                     13.8%
          11.5%




           18-29                 30-39                 40-49                 50-59    60+


Compared to the UK sector (16.5%), Goldsmiths employs less staff under 30 (11.5%).

Goldsmiths highest age bracket (30 – 39) is almost on par with the sector average (31 – 40);
27.7%.

Additionally, Goldsmiths staff aged 60 years and over are higher than last academic years
report, and more than the sector average where 8.6% of staff are over 61.


Disability

    No known impairment, health condition or learning
                     difference
                                                                                                      84.9%

    Learning difference such as dyslexia, dyspraxia or
                         AD(H)D
                                                                       5.4%

An impairment, health condition or learning difference
                 not listed above
                                                                       3.3%

  Mental health condition, challenge or disorder, such
       as depression, schizophrenia or anxiety                        2.7%

 Long-term illness or health condition such as cancer,
   HIV, diabetes, chronic heart disease, or epilepsy                  1.6%

    Physical impairment (a condition that substantially
    limits one or more basic physical activities such as… 1.0%

                    D/deaf or have a hearing impairment               0.5%

      Blind or have a visual impairment uncorrected by
                           glasses
                                                                      0.3%

   Social/communication conditions such as a speech                                          Page 14 of 46
Equality, Diversity, and Inclusion Report (2024)                      0.3%
Dinahand
      Amuah language
               and Waqarimpairment
                           Ali             or an autistic spectrum…
*Physical impairment (a condition that substantially limits one or more basic physical
 activities such as walking, climbing stairs, lifting or carrying)

*Social/communication conditions such as a speech and language impairment or an
 autistic spectrum condition

The increased number of staff to declare ‘No known disability’ indicates a greater disclosure
rate than last academic year.

The proportion of staff who disclosed a disability is more than double the sector average
(7.2%).

Within the sector, a specific learning difficulty was the most disclosed impairment type
among disabled Academic staff (26.1%), whereas a long-standing illness or health condition
was the most prevalent for disabled Professional and Support staff (21.7%).

Note: The unavailable data/’prefer not to answer’ rate for Goldsmiths staff was 9.3%



Sex


                                                   Other, 0.9%




                              Male, 43.4%

                                                                 Female,
                                                                  55.7%




   Goldsmiths number of female staff is almost on par with that of the sector average
   (55.0%), and is slightly higher while the number of male staff is slightly lower than the
   sector average (45%).

   The total number of staff who identify as ‘Other’ is the same as last academic year
   (0.9%).

                                                                                       Page 15 of 46
Equality, Diversity, and Inclusion Report (2024)
Dinah Amuah and Waqar Ali
Note: The unavailable data/’prefer not to answer’ rate was 9.7%.
          In 2017/18, HESA replaced the legal sex field with the sexual identification field and
          presented three options, ‘Female’, ‘Male’ and ‘Other’. Since the 2022 sector report,
          the data from this field was limited to those who identified as ‘Female’ or ‘Male’.
          However, where possible, data for staff who identified as ‘Other’ are included in the
          online tables.




Gender Identity



                                                                       Gender identity
                                                                        different from
                                                                       gender at birth,
                                                                             1.6%




                                                    Gender identity
                                                   same as gender at
                                                     birth, 98.4%




   Within the sector, 0.8% of UK Higher Education staff disclosed their gender identity to
   be different to the one assigned at birth. (This excludes 56.8% of staff for whom
   information was refused or blank).

   Note: Unavailable data/’prefer not to answer’ rate for Goldsmiths staff was 6.6%




                                                                                          Page 16 of 46
Equality, Diversity, and Inclusion Report (2024)
Dinah Amuah and Waqar Ali
  Ethnicity


                           White                                                      67.0%


                            Black                       11.6%


                           Asian                       10.4%


        Mixed background                             6.8%


Other ethnic background                       4.1%




  Ethnicity (breakdown)

                                            White                                      66.9%
      Black or Black British - African                         7.3%
  Black or Black British - Caribbean                         3.9%
               Other Asian Background                        3.4%
              Other Mixed Background                         3.2%
       Asian or Asian British - Indian                       3.2%
              Other Ethnic Background                        3.0%
                                        Chinese              3.0%
               Mixed - White and Asian                      1.8%
                                             Arab           1.1%
Mixed - White and Black Caribbean                           1.0%
   Asian or Asian British - Pakistani                       0.9%
   Mixed - White and Black African                          0.8%
               Other Black Background                       0.4%
      White - Gypsy/Traveller/Roma                      0.1%
Asian or Asian British - Bangladeshi                    0.0%


  The proportion of staff from a Black, Asian or other ethnic background is higher than the
  sector average (12.9%) but is significantly lower than the Goldsmiths student population
  (65%) by 31.9 percentage points.


                                                                                      Page 17 of 46
  Equality, Diversity, and Inclusion Report (2024)
  Dinah Amuah and Waqar Ali
The bar graph shows that there has been minimal or no increase in the number of Black,
Asian or other ethnic staff per group from last academic year.

Note: The sector figures used for comparative analysis of ethnicities were based on staff
who identified as UK nationals only. Advance HE recorded 39.7% of non-UK staff to identify
as Black, Asian or other ethnic staff.

The sector report noted that ‘Among both UK and non-UK staff, the largest Black, Asian and
minority ethnic group was Asian, making up 42.4% of UK Black, Asian and minority ethnic
staff and 35.7% of non-UK Black, Asian and minority ethnic staff. The smallest Black, Asian
and minority ethnic group for UK staff was Other (8.7%), while for non-UK staff it was Mixed
(11.0%).’

Unavailable data/’prefer not to answer’ rate for Goldsmiths staff was 9.1%


Religion


     55.9%




                    23.7%


                                    7.7%           6.9%
                                                          1.9%     1.8%     1.8%      0.3%    0.1%

       No     Christian Any other Muslim                  Jewish   Hindu   Buddhist   Sikh   Spiritual
     religion            religion
                         or belief


When comparing the student and staff profile, it is noted that 16% of students identify as
Christians compared to 23.7% of staff; an increase of just over a quarter. For Muslims, the
figures are opposite, where half the number of staff (6.9%) identify as Muslim in comparison
to students (14%).

Sector data presents 51.5% of staff identify as having “No religion”, 34.4% identified as
Christian, and 4.8% identified as Muslim.

Note: The sector data excludes 35.2% of all staff for whom information was refused or blank.
Unavailable data/’prefer not to answer’ rate for Goldsmiths was 27.5%



                                                                                               Page 18 of 46
Equality, Diversity, and Inclusion Report (2024)
Dinah Amuah and Waqar Ali
Sexual Orientation

                                                   Other sexual
                                                   orientation,
                                                      3.1%

                                                             Gay,
                                                          Lesbian or
                                                           Bisexual,
                                                            14.9%




                                        Heterosexual,
                                           82.0%




Goldsmiths has a relatively large LGBTQ+ staff population. 18% of staff identify as LGBTQ+,
which is similar to its student population (20%).

Across UK Higher Education Staff, 9.1% identify themselves as LGBTQ+. Goldsmiths has a
slightly higher proportion of staff identifying as “Other” (3.1%) compared to the sector (1.1%).

This sector data excludes 35.5% of all staff for whom information was refused or blank.

Unavailable data/’prefer not to answer’ rate for Goldsmiths staff was 36.1%.




Section 4: Progress on Equality Objectives

Objective 1
For everyone to take an active role in embedding equality, diversity, and inclusion
(EDI) good practice in everything that Goldsmiths does, and for staff in leadership and
management positions to champion EDI – building it into strategic decision making
and leading by example.




                                                                                      Page 19 of 46
Equality, Diversity, and Inclusion Report (2024)
Dinah Amuah and Waqar Ali
Senior Management Team Equality Champions and Equality Steering
Groups
In 2020 SMT Champions were appointed to support the embedding of equality across the
organization. During the 2021-22 academic year, Senior Management Team (SMT) Equality
Champions continued to provide strategic leadership and oversight of key equality initiatives
relating to Gender, LGBTQ+ and Disability.

SMT Champions appointed for 2023-24 are:
  • SMT Disability Equality Champion – Stephen Graham, Head of School for Arts and
     Humanities
  • SMT Gender Equality Champion – Jilly Court, Chief Operating Officer
  • SMT LGBTQ+ Equality Champion – Matthew Carlile, Head of School for Professional
     Studies, Science and Technology (PSST)
  • SMT Race Equality Champion – Frances Corner, College Warden
  • SMT Religion Equality Champion – Adam Dinham, Head of School for Culture and
     Society

SMT Equality Champions are each responsible for chairing an Equality Steering Group which
monitors the progress of agreed actions and act as a point of contact for members.


School EDI Coordinators

In 2021, School EDI Coordinators were selected from the academic staff to act as a strategic
partner to the Head of School, School Administrator and Departmental Heads on matters of
Equality, Diversity and Inclusion. By connecting EDI activity across all Academic departments
within each School, the EDI Coordinators help to collaboratively develop activities that
advance the School’s commitment to be a diverse, respectful, and caring community for staff,
students, and wider stakeholders. Through collaborative work with the Goldsmiths Equality,
Diversity and Inclusion Team these roles provide an opportunity for greater equality and
inclusion across the College.

The role has a fixed 12 month tenure after which there is an opportunity for new candidates
to apply for the role.

There are EDI Coordinators for:

     •    The School of Arts and Humanities (A&H)
     •    The School of Media, Communications and Cultural Studies (MCCS)
     •    The School of Professional Studies, Science and Technology (PSST)


During the 2023–2024 academic year, the School EDI Coordinators continued to support
ongoing initiatives and engage in regular activities throughout the year.



                                                                                    Page 20 of 46
Equality, Diversity, and Inclusion Report (2024)
Dinah Amuah and Waqar Ali
   A workshop on how to support students from Non-Traditional Backgrounds (NTBs) was
   organised by Dr Ashok Jansari (EDI Coordinator for PSST), on 13th December 2023.
   These included students from the following backgrounds:

        • Global majority
        • First generation
        • First or second generation in the UK
        • Living at home
        • Mature (including Access)
        • Commuting from a distance

The workshop involved a few activities using WooClap to get thoughts from attendees on
what their knowledge or understanding of what NTB means, what challenges students from
such backgrounds might face and thoughts for how Goldsmiths could support these
students. About 20 members of staff attended and there was general agreement that we
need to become more aware of this group of students as well as find ways to support them.

Additionally, Deirdre Osborne (EDI Coordinator for AH) has established the departmental
EDI leads network, meeting twice a term to discuss best practices and address shared
issues. She has also organised two EDI events in collaboration with external partners: the
Gary Younge Lecture and Special Issue of Race Today (2023), as well as the International
Black Speculative Writing Three-Day Festival/Conference. Furthermore, Deirdre has
consolidated the A&H departmental EDI network's resolution to involve all colleagues in EDI
commitment as 'stakeholders', ensuring that ethical practices and principles are embedded
for all, rather than placing sole responsibility on those with direct lived experience.


Staff Networks

Goldsmiths currently has several staff led networks including: ‘(Dis)ability Staff Network’,
‘Women @ Goldsmiths’, ‘Goldsmiths Race Equality Group (GREG)’, ‘LGBTQ+ Staff
Network’, ‘Menopause Support Network’ and ‘Parents and Carers Network’.

The networks are open to allies and provide a safe space for staff to share any concerns
regarding governance and practices related to equality, diversity and inclusion and provide
suggestions. The staff networks also act as a consultative group for organisational processes
and implementation such as Equality Impact Assessments and Inclusion activities.

Each of the six staff networks have grown in numbers throughout the year, with the
(Dis)Ability network successfully piloting a hybrid format with positive feedback from
members, co-chairs, and EDI staff.



   Between September 2023 and August 2024, the Staff Networks made significant progress.


                                                                                       Page 21 of 46
Equality, Diversity, and Inclusion Report (2024)
Dinah Amuah and Waqar Ali
   Women@Goldsmiths Network

   The Women@Goldsmiths Network saw progress in visibility, engagement, and cross-
   network collaboration. In March, the network led a powerful programme for Women’s
   History Month, with highlights including a Launch Event on International Women’s Day
   featuring poetry, live music, guest speaker Mateja Rajacic (UN Women UK delegate), and
   community celebration.

   The network also hosted Special Collections and Textile Section tours and collaborated on
   the Knit@Gold Club with the (Dis)Ability Network.

   (Dis)Ability Network

   The (Dis)Ability Network focused on raising awareness and creating inclusive spaces for
   staff. Following a very successful and emotional Cancer Café networking event during
   Race Equality Week, the network marked Neurodiversity Celebration Week with a standout
   "In Conversation" event with Professor Jason Arday, which received strong engagement
   both from internal and external participants. The network launched the Knit@Gold Club in
   partnership with the Women@Goldsmiths Network and planned a "Coffee with the
   Disability Network" session to further community support. Discussions on campus
   accessibility, neurodiversity, and wellbeing remained central to the network’s work
   throughout the year, highlighted by a well-attended meeting with the Vice Chancellor.

   Parents and Carers Network

   The Parents and Carers Network re-established its presence and focused on expanding its
   visibility and relevance. It held its first network meeting of the academic year in February
   and followed up with a successful "Coffee with the Parents and Carers Network" session at
   the Wellbeing Centre in April.

   LGBTQ+ Network

   The LGBTQ+ Network delivered a broad range of educational and cultural activities. This
   included a World AIDS Day film screening, launching of a Conversation Club, and a
   marking of LGBTQ+ History Month with film screenings and three well-attended webinars
   featuring academic and professional services staff such as Carmen Yau, Justin Bengry,
   and Ash Green.

   To mark IDAHOBIT, members shared their reflections on a Top 5 LGBTQ+ reading list.



   GREG (Goldsmiths Race Equality Group) Network

   GREG has maintained a strong dialogue with leadership through a series of Q&A sessions
   with the Vice-Chancellor and members which took place throughout the year.



                                                                                     Page 22 of 46
Equality, Diversity, and Inclusion Report (2024)
Dinah Amuah and Waqar Ali
   During Black History Month, GREG gathered for an in-person lunch to mark the month and
   welcome new and current colleagues to the network. An in-person gathering was also held
   at the Wellbeing Centre in May.

   Menopause Network

   The Menopause Network focused on policy advocacy and internal culture change. The
   group shifted away from public-facing events to concentrate on revisiting Goldsmiths’
   Menopause Policy. The network also began exploring Menopause Passports to support
   staff accommodations and obtained College employment data, focusing on age and
   gender identity, to better understand menopause’s workplace impact.

   Staff Engagement

   Staff members are actively being involved in consultation with POD through focus groups
   and opportunities to provide feedback on policy revision and development, providing lived
   experience insight into prospective change. An example being focus groups that were held
   to review policies on flexible retirements and fixed-term contracts.

   This academic year saw regular monthly meetings between the EDI team and School EDI
   Coordinators to improve communication between academic and professional services staff
   and ensure equitable impacts of EDI initiatives.




Objective 2
Through the aims of, Goldsmiths’ access and participation plan, implement outreach
and inclusion activities to attract, retain, and support students from lower socio-
economic and ‘non-traditional’ backgrounds and underrepresented groups.


Note: Data for the 2023-24 academic year provided by the Office for Students’ access and
participation data dashboard was unavailable by the time of the completion of this report.
Please refer to the 2022-23 Equality Diversity and Inclusion report to see previous figures
and achievements.


Access and Participation Plans
Access and participation plans set out how universities will improve equality of opportunity for
students from disadvantaged and under-represented backgrounds. In 2023-24, we continued
to deliver our 2020-21 to 2024-25 access and participation plan. As this plan will soon come
to an end, we spent the latter half of 2023-24 working with students and staff across the
university to develop a new access and participation plan for 2025-26 to 2028-29. This plan
includes an assessment of our performance in access, success and progression, an analysis
of the risks to equality of opportunity being faced by our students, new objectives and targets


                                                                                      Page 23 of 46
Equality, Diversity, and Inclusion Report (2024)
Dinah Amuah and Waqar Ali
for our work and several detailed intervention strategies and commitments designed to help
us meet our targets. This new plan was approved by the Office for Students in January 2025
and is now published on our website.

Our activities
Our 2023-24 outreach activities aimed to maintain the existing diversity of our student body,
address sector-wide and societal issues impacting equality of access to higher education and
meet the needs and expectations of schools, colleges and communities in our local area and
beyond. In support of these aims, the Student Success team delivered an intensive
programme of activities, as below.

The Brilliant Club Scholars’ Programme
We delivered The Scholars Programme in collaboration with The Brilliant Club. This
programme is targeted at 8- to 18-year-old students who are eligible for pupil premium, live in
the most deprived areas (IDACI quintiles 1 and 2), and have no parental experience of higher
education. Students complete a series of university-style group tutorials, delivered by a
trained PhD tutor, and attend a graduation event held at a university campus. In 2023-24, 457
Scholars Programme students from 34 schools attended graduation events on Goldsmiths’
campus. During these events, students attended workshops delivered by the Widening
Participation team, participated in Q&As with student ambassadors, toured Goldsmiths’
campus and enjoyed lunch in the refectory. 7 Goldsmiths researchers delivered 34 Scholars
Programme placements in schools and colleges, reaching a further 475 students across 30
schools. Students studying with a Goldsmiths researcher made strong progress across
several academic competencies, demonstrating an 18-point increase in subject knowledge,
critical thinking and written communication, exceeding national averages. Additionally, data
from the Higher Education Access Tracker (HEAT) has shown that The Scholars Programme
has a positive impact on GCSE attainment, with participants more likely to achieve a 9-5 in
Maths and English than their peers.

Discover Gold

Discover Gold is a programme through which groups of students from our target schools and
colleges visit Goldsmiths’ campus for a taster of university life. Most Discover Gold events
include information, advice and guidance about university, Q&As with current students,
campus tours, lunch and academic taster sessions delivered by Goldsmiths academics
across a wide range of departments. Approximately 800 students visited Goldsmiths for a
Discover Gold event in 2023-24. Teachers and school leaders were required to ensure that at
least 50% of attendees are eligible for free school meals, and we have also delivered
targeted events for mature learners, those with special educational needs and care-
experienced and estranged students. Evaluation shows that participants are still more likely
to agree with the following statements after attending a Discover Gold event:

      • ‘Higher education is for people like me.’
      • ‘I would fit in well academically with others in higher education.’
      • ‘I would fit in well socially with others in higher education.’


                                                                                    Page 24 of 46
Equality, Diversity, and Inclusion Report (2024)
Dinah Amuah and Waqar Ali
These responses suggest an improvement in participants’ sense of belonging in relation to
higher education as per the TASO validated scale for access and success.

Schools and colleges engagement

The Student Success team managed relationships with a portfolio of approximately 100
target schools and colleges in 2023-24. Schools and colleges were prioritised for
engagement based on a complex basket of criteria, including free school meals eligibility,
ethnic diversity and qualification types. Across the year, the team visited schools and colleges
to attend careers and higher education fairs and deliver workshops about student finance and
university life, provided 1-1 personal statement and application support, and led mock
interviews. We also coordinated academic visits to schools and colleges where colleagues
delivered subject taster sessions and workshops.

Addey and Stanhope mentoring programme
Gold Futures is a six-week programme where student ambassadors mentor Year 9 students
at Addey and Stanhope School, one of our core partner schools. In spring 2023-24, young
people at Addey and Stanhope took part in six weekly sessions, culminating in a graduation
ceremony held on Goldsmiths’ campus. Following the programme, participants’ reported
improvements in their confidence and their understanding of what it would be like to attend
university.

Art summer school

In 2023-24, 19 students attended our Art summer school, a 10 day on-campus studio based
programme delivered by the Goldsmiths Art department, in collaboration with Student
Success. Participants had the opportunity to work with visiting graduate artists, learn artistic
crafts, experience arts-making in a studio setting, and learn university application skills. The
summer school was targeted at those who were eligible for free school meals, had no familial
experience of Higher Education, lived in IMD and POLAR4 Q1 areas and/or belonged to the
Global Ethnic Majority. Graduates of the summer school were eligible for a guaranteed
interview for Goldsmiths’ Fine Art programmes.




Alchemy

Alchemy is a programme of professional and creative music skills training delivered
alongside youth work and mentoring activities. Students are referred by schools, partner
organisations and social workers based on concerns they are at-risk of dropping out of
education and/or demonstrating patterns of non-attendance, poor academic performance,
lack of engagement with their studies and/or are not in education, employment or training
(NEET). In 2023-24, the programme brought together artists, youth workers, community and
creative organisations and current Goldsmiths students to deliver an intensive programme of
workshops, 1-1 mentoring and industry masterclasses to approximately 75 young people
from 14 schools and colleges. Programme outputs included performance events and album

                                                                                      Page 25 of 46
Equality, Diversity, and Inclusion Report (2024)
Dinah Amuah and Waqar Ali
releases. The programme is delivered by the Alchemy team and supported by Student
Success.

Progression agreements

Progression agreements grant prospective students at specific schools and colleges, or
studying for specific qualifications, unique admission benefits for Goldsmiths’ courses,
including guaranteed interviews and/or offers for more than fifty undergraduate programmes.
In most cases, offers are set one grade below the standard offer. In 2023-24, we had
progression agreements in place with Lewisham College, Southwark College, Mulberry UTC,
OCN and LASER (accreditors of Access to HE Diplomas). Students joining the university
under a progression agreement tend to be overwhelmingly classified as mature students,
supporting our aims to ensure that Goldsmiths is accessible to all students who may benefit
from our courses.

Supporting care-experienced and estranged students

In 2023-24, we continued to work with partner organisations to deliver specific outreach
activities targeted at care-experienced, estranged and asylum seeker students. This has
included working with Lewisham and Southwark Colleges and delivering webinars to care-
experienced students attending Virtual Schools across London.


Our activities
Financial support
Goldsmiths provided a wide range of awards for students facing financial difficulties through
our Student Hardship Fund. The fund, which incorporates the Childcare Fund, is a limited
fund to assist disadvantaged students experiencing financial hardship to continue with their
studies and attendance at Goldsmiths. In total, £250,000 of funding was distributed to
students between September 2023 and June 2024 through the Travel and Hardship Funds.

We also offered a wide range of financial support targeted at students belonging to specific
groups in 2023-24. These awards are designed to support students to complete their studies
successfully. The awards and number of recipients for the 2023-24 year include:

     •    The Mature Student Scholarship (two awards are reserved for applicants nominated
          by Open Book – see below) – 10 students
     •    The Care-Experienced and Estranged Students Bursary – 32 students
     •    The Access Programme Scholarship – 5 students
     •    The Disabled Students’ Bursary – 4 students
     •    Goldsmiths Equity Awards – 35 students
     •    Lewisham Borough Fee Waiver – 5 students
     •    New Cross Fire Bursaries – 3 students




                                                                                    Page 26 of 46
Equality, Diversity, and Inclusion Report (2024)
Dinah Amuah and Waqar Ali
   The Mature Student Scholarship is designed to support mature students to complete their
   studies, through providing an annual award of £3,000. The Student Hardship Fund,
   incorporating the Childcare Fund, is a limited fund to assist disadvantaged students
   experiencing financial hardship to continue with their studies and attendance at
   Goldsmiths.


Targeted pastoral support

In 2023-24, the Student Success team expanded our work with care-experienced and
estranged students, identifying named contacts who provide bespoke support to address the
specific challenges faced by these students while on-course. This work is expected to
continue and intensify over the coming years. In addition, we delivered enhanced welcome,
induction and transition activities tailored to address the needs of mature students, disabled
students, international students and care-experienced and estranged students. These
packages incorporated online webinars and in-person activities.

Addressing attainment gaps
Our 2020-21 to 2024-25 access and participation plan included targets to address attainment
gaps for Black, Asian and IMD Q1 students. Work to address attainment gaps in 2023-24 has
included embedding commitments to reduce attainment gaps in department development
plans (DDPs), the continued delivery of the College’s Race Justice Strategy, and the
provision of financial, pastoral and academic support to students from particular groups, for
example through our flagship Equity Awards scheme and the Teaching and Learning
Innovation Centre (TaLIC). There were 34 Equity Scholars in 2023-24 (35 awards were given
but 1 student was unable to provide the requisite information).

In addition to the funds given towards living costs, what students value equally is the sense of
cohesion they get from being part of the Equity Award scheme. They also flourish with the
guidance, enrichment activities and pastoral care given by their Academic Lead, Dr Marl’Ene
Edwin. This leads to better retention outcomes overall amongst the cohorts of award
recipients.

Teaching, Learning and Innovation Centre
During 2023-24, the educational developer with a focus on academic decolonisation
continued to take actions in support of a decolonised and inclusive academic practice to
foster the belonging and success of students from diverse backgrounds.

Following the actions from the strategy designed in 2022-23, a focus group with GEM
students was run to gather feedback and identify the weakest areas of academic practice
regarding inclusion and decolonial approach. A plan of action and recommendations is being
designed for implementation in subsequent academic years. Bespoke sessions with
departments continued to support academic staff in their decolonising efforts, expanding to
some sessions with students across modules with a component of decolonial theory.
Out of these sessions, two toolkits were designed and published, one targeted at academic
decolonisation in curriculum and pedagogy design for academic staff, and one targeted at


                                                                                     Page 27 of 46
Equality, Diversity, and Inclusion Report (2024)
Dinah Amuah and Waqar Ali
students with a more general approach, targeting theory and values of academic
decolonisation to support their understanding of changes across curriculum and pedagogies
and their interests in decolonial theory.

The PGCHE continues to be a key area of the decolonising and inclusive efforts, including
contents and sessions across all modules, also aligning the presence of decolonial
approaches in the assessment methods. Similar sessions were also provided in the Ready to
teach course and the Advanced HE Experiential Route, aiming to represent academic
decolonisation at all routes of CPD.

Counselling and Mental Health Services

In 2023-24, the work has continued to consolidate the Wellbeing Framework by working
towards joining Student Minds Mental Health Charter. Goldsmiths Wellbeing Framework
already sets out a whole institution's approach to creating and maintaining an environment
where student wellbeing can thrive. Student Minds University Mental Health Charter
Programme supports member universities on a journey of continuous improvement to adopt
evidence-based good practice principles that will promote student wellbeing and good mental-
health.

The Student Wellbeing team, Mental Health Advisers and The Counselling Service offers
holistic emotional, mental health support and short-term therapy. The service also provides
links with external specialist support agencies, with some appointments offered on-site at
Goldsmiths, which is particularly helpful for students who may have limited time or may only
be able to attend appointments whilst they are on Goldsmiths’ campus. The local NHS
Talking Therapy and substance misuse support service offer sessions to students on site in
collaboration with Goldsmiths.

There is also an Out-Of-Hours Service (the Campus Support Officers) who provide support,
advice and referrals in the evenings, at night and at weekends. The Multi-Faith Chaplaincy
team also plays a central role in providing a listening ear to students of all faiths and none,
particularly to those who may be more reluctant to approach official mental-health or disability
services to request support.

There is a high demand for access to Counselling so a renewed collaboration on referral
pathways has been designed between the Amersham Vale GP practice, Lewisham Talking
Therapy, designated charities and our own mental health advisers and counsellors to ensure
that students are directed to the services best able to see them. As part of this, the
Counselling has also welcomed 2 trainee counsellors to see students in need of emotional
support but who do not present a risk to themselves or others. A robust risk-management is
in place in Students Support Services which relies on coordinated case management
overseen by the Head of Student Support.

Disabled students
As mentioned above, Disabled Students disclosure stands at 33%, 13 points higher than the
average in the sector. The system to disclose and come forward to request adjustments and


                                                                                     Page 28 of 46
Equality, Diversity, and Inclusion Report (2024)
Dinah Amuah and Waqar Ali
support has been made easier in the past couple of years and this has accounted for such
high levels of disclosure. Students have continued accessing our ‘Assistive Technology
Centre’ in the Library and we have funded assistive software for students, and one-to-one
support such as specialist study skills, mentoring, study assistance and BSL interpreters for
those students who were not able to apply for it via the Disabled Students Allowance.
Changes that Student Finance England has made in the administration of the Disabled
Students Allowance this year has caused delayed in some of our disabled students seeking
to receive assistive technology and one-to-one support. The Disability Advisers have tried to
compensate for the disadvantage created by putting in place interim support that Goldsmiths
has funded. We also continue to work with some organisations under the umbrella of the
NHS Right to Choose to facilitate quicker ADHD and Autism Spectrum Disorders
Assessments, reducing the time students had to wait from 2 years (on the NHS) to a few
months.

The Disability team continues to have a dedicated presence and active involvement in the
design of certain events such as Open Days and Applicant Days to encourage applications
from the disabled students’ community and to publicise the support and adjustments available
to prospective and current students.

Mature learners
Goldsmiths Open Book is a multi-award-winning programme that aims to break down barriers
to higher education by working closely with a network of agencies to support people from a
wide range of backgrounds, such as reformed-offenders, prisoners and those who have
struggled with addiction and mental health. Through reaching out to marginalised
communities, Open Book reaches hundreds of its constituents each year; all are individuals
that would not have engaged with higher education. The Open Book programme has
supported over 300 people from key skills through to undergraduate and post graduate study;
Goldsmiths Open Book continues to recruit under those from the most marginalised
communities onto graduate programmes at Goldsmiths. Goldsmiths Open Book has provided
thousands with their first experience of university.

Goldsmiths Open Book is engaged in provision with many of the constituencies it works for,
these include:

Goldsmiths Open Book is now working in three prisons, including the women’s prison HMP
Downview, providing level 3 learning with students continuing their education with Goldsmiths
Open Book, on release. We continue to work with educational academics developing
university entry qualifications, combining Level 3 study alongside accreditation for prior
experiential learning.

Goldsmiths is running free community classes in 15 different subjects, from maths to music,
both in person and online. Classes are delivered in New Cross, Camden and Medway where
we recently completed a film funded by the Heritage fund and Medway council and are
discussing further projects; the film was co-created with members of the working-class
community from the area. In April, we will be initiating film making classes in the area with
film, lighting and editing equipment provided by St Margaret’s Church in Rainham.


                                                                                    Page 29 of 46
Equality, Diversity, and Inclusion Report (2024)
Dinah Amuah and Waqar Ali
We are working with the Pupil Referral Unit (PRU), Phoenix place in Camberwell to deliver an
Extended Project Qualification (EPQ) at levels 2 and 3 and have recently started work with
Faceworks in Lewisham, delivering our EPQ to the refugee community.

Goldsmiths Open Book will begin providing Film and Media classes at St Margret’s Church in
Rainham, Kent in May.

Since 2021 we have been working as part of a knowledge exchange partnership with
the Public Collaboration Lab, University of Arts London, Camden Council and local
community organisations in Camden. The Extended Project Qualification framework was
identified as a mechanism to support Camden residents to realise ideas for social action and
accredit their learning. The local residents scope, research, prototype and define a social
action project or business. They are then supported to apply for the We Make Camden
Kit funding, which enables participants to continue to make their idea a reality.

In 2023 the first pilot of the Social Action EPQ was delivered in Somers Town, Kings Cross,
one of twelve London neighbourhoods was selected for the GLA funding as part of the Future
Neighbourhoods 2030 scheme. Project outcomes have included:

     •    Bengali Mother Tongue: stay and play drop-ins that support parents and young
          children to learn to speak, read and write in English and Bengali.
     •    The Children Will Save Us: Climate and sustainability workshops, with a focus on craft
          and storytelling for local children.
     •    Stitch By Stitch: Community sewing workshops, that teach local women how to make,
          recycle and upcycle garments.
     •    Swap Don’t Shop: Community clothes swapping events.

          This is an ongoing programme.

Prison Projects

Open Book has been delivering education in prison since 2017. We have worked with HMP
Isis, HMP Downview, HMP Swaleside, and HMP Wandsworth to enable students to build
research, creativity and critical thinking skills through the Extended Project Qualification.

Students have produced projects focussing on Photography, Social Anthropology, History,
Creative Writing and Philosophy. Several of them have used this qualification as a starting
point to access higher education.

HMP Downview - Since 2021 Open Book have been facilitating the Open Book EPQ at HMP
Downview Women’s Prison. There we work in partnership with third sector arts organisations
that have a specific focus on working with women in the criminal justice system. Facilitators
from partner arts organisations work with participants to explore a creative medium and build
a portfolio of creative work. Open Book use their unique approach to develop academic
literacy and support participants to research and develop individual projects that provides
depth and understanding to the themes they are exploring. At the end of this process guests
from inside and outside of the prison, along with family and friends of the participants, are
invited to a showcase event, in which each participant presents their work and take part in a
panel discuss.

                                                                                      Page 30 of 46
Equality, Diversity, and Inclusion Report (2024)
Dinah Amuah and Waqar Ali
Creative pathways that we currently deliver include Theatre and Performance, in
partnership with Clean Break; Digital Storytelling, in partnership with Stretch.



Objective 3
Through the aims of our Learning and Teaching Assessment Strategy (LTAS), take
steps to develop a more inclusive curriculum and pedagogy, considering the needs
and strengths of a diverse and multicultural student body.




Liberate our Library
Through the Liberate our Library initiative, the Library continues to work with teaching staff
and the Students Union to decolonise and diversify reading lists in line with the Learning,
Teaching & Assessment strategic objective of ‘liberate our degrees’, to ensure students see
themselves reflected in the curriculum. Our aim is to represent all scholars form all
backgrounds. The Library works with departmental liberation and decolonisation groups
where such groups are in place. The ‘Liberate our degrees’ collection now has 1100+
resources. These resources are suggested for acquisition by students and staff.




                                                                                      Page 31 of 46
Equality, Diversity, and Inclusion Report (2024)
Dinah Amuah and Waqar Ali
The Library has created several alternative liberation reading lists, such as: Black Lives
Matter, Pride & LGBT+ History, Disability and Decolonising Research Methods.

In the 2024-25 academic year, work will begin to decolonise the curriculum and improve the
inclusivity and accessibility of learning, teaching and assessment practices through an
intervention on Reading Lists. In connection with the Decolonisation / Anti-racist Pedagogy
Strategy, Library Services will audit reading lists for global majority authors and support
departments in their self-assessment activities.

Within a phased roll-out we will develop a metric for improving reading list inclusivity based
on representation of a more diverse scope of knowledge and authors’ identities within course
materials. This will be supplemented with a portal of materials to allow the approach to be
generalised across Goldsmiths departments.


Zines

The Library continues to build the Liberate! Zines Collection recognising the intersectionality
of institutionally oppressed groups. The Zines collection is housed on the second floor of the
Library and has grown to include 325 titles.


Positive Action Graduate Traineeship

The UK library workforce identifies as 91.9% White*- this is compared to a UK population that
identifies as 87.4% White**. With Global Ethnic Majority (GEM) staff so underrepresented
within the library and information sector, as part of our EDI work, the library offers a positive
action graduate traineeship to a graduate who identifies as GEM.

The annual traineeship offers an opportunity for a GEM Graduate who has not necessarily
had any experience but is interested in exploring a career in the library and information sector
to do so. The role was designed so that it allows the successful candidate the opportunity to
experience library work across all its core functions, enabling the individual to gain a broad
range of experience and the skills and knowledge to build a career in libraries.

We recruited a Goldsmiths Alumna to this role in 2023/24. She successfully completed the
traineeship, moving onto work in the HE library sector. Recruitment to this post will continue
with the new trainee starting in October 2025.

Collection Development and Management

The Library has drafted an updated Collection Management Policy to look at what we collect
and why, to tackle problematic and offensive subject headings, as well as how to address
contentious materials in line with our decolonisation work. The library continues to acquire
fully accessible learning resources in eBook format, where available, and invest in more
digital learning resources to support online teaching delivery.



                                                                                      Page 32 of 46
Equality, Diversity, and Inclusion Report (2024)
Dinah Amuah and Waqar Ali
Given changes to content usage and supply, it is timely that in 2025 that we review our
strategic approach to purchasing and managing content and develop a new policy approach
for both main and special collections. This work will have EDI at its core.

In 2023-24, in co-creation with Goldsmiths’ students, Special Collections established the new
Goldsmiths for Palestine archival collection. This collection delivered the university’s
commitment to Goldsmiths for Palestine for the creation of an archive on the legacy of
student occupations at the university.




Teaching

The Academic Support Team (AST), and the Royal Literary Fellows continue to deliver an
online and in person academic support and study skills programme, working collaboratively
with academic departments. The AST deliver the ‘Resistance Researching’ workshops
designed to help students think more critically about how they find and use information from a
social justice perspective. Examples of these workshops are ‘How to Dismantle a Library’
and ‘Critical Citation’.

Research Cafes
The Library’s Research Cafe events provide academics and research students an opportunity
to present their work to an audience of students, staff and the public. The format is a ten-
minute presentation followed by a question-and-answer session in a relaxed, friendly
environment in our ground floor event space.

In 2023-24, Research Cafés covered indigenous peoples, veganism and multilingualism.
Within 2024-25 we are expanding Research Cafés via a collaboration with London Borough
of Lewisham.


*https://www.cilip.org.uk/page/Workforcemapping ‘A Study of the UK Information
workforce/CILIP (Chartered Institute of Library and Information Professionals) and ARA
(Archives and Records Association) commissioned report



                                                                                    Page 33 of 46
Equality, Diversity, and Inclusion Report (2024)
Dinah Amuah and Waqar Ali
** https://www.sconul.ac.uk/knowledge-hub/equality-diversity-and-inclusion/ ‘SCONUL
Equality, Diversity & Inclusion Statistics report: Ethnicity of our Workforce’/SCONUL (Society
of College, National and University Libraries) report




Objective 4
Ensure that EDI is considered in Estates and IT planning and development to enable
physical and virtual environments (including teaching and learning spaces, core and
circulation spaces, and IT systems) to be accessible for everyone.




In 2023–24, Estates and Facilities continued to strengthen its commitment to embedding
equality, diversity, and inclusion (EDI) into all aspects of planning, development, and
operational delivery. As in previous years, Equality Impact Analyses (EIAs) and adherence to
the Disability Discrimination Act (DDA) 2005 (as per the Equality Act 2010) remained integral
to our standard tendering processes and project design.

Building on the findings from the campus-wide accessibility review conducted in partnership
with AccessAble, we progressed with targeted improvements to our physical estate. The
insights from this review have informed our prioritisation of key accessibility upgrades and
provided valuable guidance for ongoing maintenance and refurbishment projects.

We also worked to raise awareness of the accessibility information available to staff,
students, and visitors through the Goldsmiths website, ensuring that the published
AccessAble guides were more prominently signposted and easier to access.

Signage continued to be reviewed throughout 2023–24, with updates carried out where
required in response to identified gaps or maintenance issues. These adjustments supported
clearer wayfinding and complemented broader efforts to ensure an inclusive and navigable
campus environment. This work built on previous years’ improvements and was informed by
user feedback and insights from the accessibility review.



                                                                                     Page 34 of 46
Equality, Diversity, and Inclusion Report (2024)
Dinah Amuah and Waqar Ali
Objective 5
To capture and store comprehensive and robust EDI data to support the delivery of an
inclusive and supportive environment for staff, students and stakeholders – with
demonstrable improvement in declaration rates when reviewed annually

Staff data

Since 2021 staff equality data has been used to inform detailed analysis of our staff lifecycle
as part of the ‘Research Excellence Framework’, Recovery Programme Equality Impact
Assessments (EIAs) and Positive Action Initiatives.

To gain better insight into the diversity of our community and those we cater for, ethnicity
variables have been disaggregated and will help to better inform the data we hold and the
approach with which we create services, policies, and inclusive activities.

Student data

We publish our APP (Access and Participation Plan) - where we set targets for reducing the
degree awarding gaps, on our website. We also publish our annual monitoring return to the
OfS (Office for Students) on progress against the APP on our website.

In 2023-24, with the move to PowerBI dashboards internally, this was an opportunity to
embed APP characteristics by design across all our data outputs. Any datasets used in our
dashboards contain these fields wherever the data is available.

Our recruitment suite has dedicated demographic pages and all other dashboards (data
availability permitting) allow the user to look at the data through an APP lens with the use of
filters. These dashboards are available to all staff.

Academic Departments are required to report on work undertaken to remove the ethnicity
degree awarding gaps through Departmental Development Plans which are undertaken as
part of the Annual Planning Process. The College invested in staffing resource with specialist
knowledge of inclusive curriculum and decolonising academic practice by recruiting an
Educational Developer (Decolonising Academic Practice) at the start of the academic year, in
September 2022, to the Teaching and Learning Innovation Centre (TALIC) to advance
decolonising efforts.

During the academic year 2023-24, several actions have been developed to advance
academic decolonisation, some of which were:

• Including academic decolonisation as a key topic across the 2 years of the PGCHE

• Incentive and support the discussion of decolonial praxis within the Experiential Route for
  Advance HE

                                                                                      Page 35 of 46
Equality, Diversity, and Inclusion Report (2024)
Dinah Amuah and Waqar Ali
• The publication of a toolkit focused on academic decolonisation in curricula and
  pedagogical development

• Ongoing collaboration with departments through bespoke CPD sessions around academic
  decolonisation




Objective 6
Engage staff, students, and stakeholders with EDI at Goldsmiths by celebrating
diversity, progress, and achievements, linking up with our internal academic experts
in EDI, and fostering a culture of collaboration and open communication.

South Asian Heritage Month
In efforts to raise awareness of South Asian Heritage and promote inclusivity, Goldsmiths
celebrated this event in June 2024, which was earlier than the national dates of recognition
(18th July to 17th August 2024) as staff and students are usually away on the summer break
during this period.

To celebrate SAHM the EDI team hosted Manuraj Shunmugasundaram, an Advocate who
practises at the Madras High Court, to deliver an online talk on 'The Self-Respect Movement
and Anti-Caste Politics in Southern India'. Manuraj highlighted this year's theme of 'Free to
be me' during his talk, emphasising the concept of self-respect. Additionally, Iyengar Institute
and House of Henna delivered a free Yoga session and Henna body art for staff and students.

Black History Month

Goldsmiths marked this year’s Black History Month (BHM) with eight separate film
screenings of some of the best-known movies relating to Black history and culture. These
were open to members of the public.

The 2nd Black Knowledge Symposium was held in person with guest speakers Annette Hay,
Head of Equality, Diversity and Inclusion at De Monfort University, Dr Arun Verma, Head of
Inclusion at University of London, Kevin Brazant, Founder of Lounge Akademics, Goldsmiths
Alumni and Professional Practice Director at Daddy CPR and Goldsmiths Undergraduate
History Students, Selena Carty and Fatou Marong. This was a panel-led discussion on 'The
Black Tendency' and its historical dominance on the experiences of the Black community
across academia, career progression and social inclusion.

Staff, Students and members of the public were invited to visit the local Migration Museum in
Lewisham and Tate Gallery for their African Heritage Tours.


                                                                                      Page 36 of 46
Equality, Diversity, and Inclusion Report (2024)
Dinah Amuah and Waqar Ali
In collaboration with Tate Gallery, concession tickets were provided for Staff and Students to
visit the Zanele Muholi exhibition at Tate Modern. A comedy night featuring artists of colour,
Toussaint Douglass, Ola Labib, Ed Kear, Micah Hall was held at The Goldsmiths Student
Union, and opened to members of the public to attend.




Generation Delta: multi-institutional project, 2022-2026
Generation Delta is a UKRI – Research England funded project that draws together a
consortium of 6 universities (led by University of Leeds) working to create the foundations for
a long-term increase in the number of Black, Asian and minority Ethnic (BAME) women
professors. The project is designed and focused in particular on addressing both institutional
and individual barriers experienced by BAME women at different stages of the PGR life
cycle: (i) Access to Academy/Admissions (ii) Retention and Progression and (iii) Career
Progression building on the research degree.

As reported last academic year, the project launched at Woburn House on 19th October
2022, 12pm - 2pm with a welcome address from Professor Frances Corner. At the event Prof
Corner outlined Goldsmiths' commitment and support for Generation Delta in the context of
the institution's Race Justice Strategy. Over a 100 people registered for the hybrid event.

The Generation Delta Network

The goal is to create a lasting legacy for Black and racially minoritised women at Goldsmiths
and beyond through the national GD network. Officially launched in January 2023, the
network currently has 30 members from Goldsmiths and other local universities and works to
provide emotional support, professional guidance, and a safe space for sharing experiences
and developing collective strategies to acknowledge and address institutional barriers.

Studentships

During the 2023-24 academic year, there was a third annual call launched in February
2024. Around 20 applications were received.


Themes covered during this cohort were:

    •     Recognising microaggressions

    •     Presenting with confidence

    •     Accessing support

    •     Building a career


                                                                                     Page 37 of 46
Equality, Diversity, and Inclusion Report (2024)
Dinah Amuah and Waqar Ali
      •    Community building

The network had to provide exceptional support for students during this year, following the
escalation of violence in Gaza, as well as around the Goldsmiths Transformation Programme
and potential loss of supervisors. The double impact (trauma) of these events and
development for some students needed to be formally acknowledged and responded to. This
issue was raised at the Graduate School Board in June 2024.

Funding was awarded to:

  •       Mia Tuckey (MCCS) - ‘The Moderation Archive: Renegotiating visibility and affective
          exploitation in performance governance’

  •       Adriana Arroyo (ART) - ‘A Liquid Body: Activating memory in the context of coloniality
          along the San Juan River, Central America’

Previous awardees were:

  •       Angela Loum (Sociology) - ‘An Analysis of the Pain of Women of Colour in Childbirth
          and the Vernacularisation of Human Rights’

  •       Clémentine Bedos - ‘Techno-Tantrik Embodiment’

  •       Sula Douglas Folkes (Visual Cultures) ‘Black women’s cinema: a ‘living archive’’

  •       Abdul- Vajid Punakkath (English Literature) - ‘Rebel-Subject at the Dawn of the
          Biopolitical: A Critical-Theoretical Study of Mappila Rebellion, 1836- 1921’

  •       Devina Paramdeo Project RA (Education) - ‘Parental school choice in the context
          of gentrification: A case study of Lewisham and Southwark’

      Events and Presentations included a Graduate School induction in October, an Artist
      Citizen’s Jury, hosted by the Art Department in November, a Careers workshops for
      undergraduate students focused on PhD study, the Purposeful Doctorate Symposium
      hosted by SKOPE at Oxford University in December, the Generation Delta Seminar Series
      launched in January 2024, and a Generation Delta Showcase, hosted by the Graduate
      School, and a presentation at ‘Closing the Gap Symposium’, Cambridge University, both
      in March 2024.

      Disability History Month

      From 16 November - 16 December, the UK celebrated Disability History Month, with the
      theme for this year being ‘Disability, Children and Youth’.

      To help raise awareness of the month, the College hosted a two-part series titled
      ‘Intersectionality and Disability through History’. The sessions were led by Catrina Lowri,

                                                                                         Page 38 of 46
Equality, Diversity, and Inclusion Report (2024)
Dinah Amuah and Waqar Ali
   Founder of Neuroteachers, and Frances Akinde, Special Education Needs and Disabilities
   (SEND) adviser and Neurodiversity Coach.

   Holocaust Memorial Day

   To commemorate Holocaust Memorial Day an online talk was hosted on 23 January with
   Holocaust survivor Susie Barnett, in collaboration with the Holocaust Educational Trust. In
   addition, the EDI Team organised a movie night on 25 January, which featured a screening
   of ‘Life is Beautiful’.

   Both events aimed to honour the memory of the victims and promote reflection on the
   lessons of the Holocaust.

   Race Equality Week

   Race Equality Week (REW) ran from 5 - 11 February 2024. It is a national campaign
   which aims to bring together organisations across the UK to break down barriers to race
   equality in the workplace. Organised annually by Race Equality Matters, this theme for
   2023 was ‘#ListenActChange’.

   This year the EDI team invited colleagues to have departmental ‘Bring and Share’ lunches
   featuring cuisine from their country of origin and wear their traditional attire and/or jewellery
   during the week with an aim to encourage this as a regular practice that promotes the
   concept of individuals being able to bring their authentic self to work.

   Cancer Cafe Learning and Networking Event

   As part of a sub theme for the week: ‘Race and Health in 2024’ to mark Race Equality
   Week together with World Cancer Day on 4 February, the EDI team hosted a Cancer Café
   event. The combination of both events acknowledged the intersectional challenges of race
   and healthcare stigmas which individuals from ethnic backgrounds face.

   The Cancer Café featured guest speakers included Jeff Thompson, founder of Cancer
   Don't Let It Win and (Dis)Ability network co-chairs Rose Sinclair and Keri France.



   Race and Health Talk

   Additionally, an online discussion on ‘Race and Health in 2024’ was led by the EDI Team,
   and featured guest speakers including Dawn Jones, Founder and Managing Director
   of Hope Place HR, Fatou Marong, BAME Undergraduate Student Representative and
   Student Community Leader in the Student Success team, Andrew Linton, Lecturer in
   Learning and Teaching for Higher Education (TALIC) and Royston John, former Mayor and
   Council Adviser to the Mayor of Lewisham on BAME career progression.




                                                                                         Page 39 of 46
Equality, Diversity, and Inclusion Report (2024)
Dinah Amuah and Waqar Ali
   They addressed the barriers faced by people of colour in education and the workplace, and
   how these can contribute to late diagnoses, low academic attainment and challenges in
   career development and progression.

   The team continued to promote the #MyNameIs Campaign at Goldsmiths. This featured
   short written pieces by staff and students about the origin and meaning of their names, and
   an interesting fact. The campaign was introduced by Race Equality Matters and stemmed
   from a project initiated by Dr Javeria Khadijah Shah (SFHEA) which posed the question: ‘Is
   your name a gift or a curse?’ for individuals with non-western first names who had
   experiences of feeling the pressures of conforming to westernised English norms when
   sharing their name.

   LGBTQ+ History Month
   LGBTQ+ History Month was observed throughout February, commencing with a film
   screening of ‘Paris is Burning’.

   The EDI Team delivered a series of three webinars addressing a wide range of LGBTQ+
   topics. The first, titled ‘Sexuality and Disability in Asia’, was led by Carmen Yau and
   explored the intersectionality of sexuality and disability in the Asian context. The second
   webinar, ‘The History of the Pink Pound’ was delivered by Dr. Justin Bengry and examined
   the historical and economic dimensions of LGBTQ+ communities in the UK. The final
   session, ‘Positive Voices’ featured Ash Green, who offered personal insights into the
   Positive Voices initiative.

   Pride Month

   The EDI Team, in collaboration with the LGBTQ+ Network, marked Pride Month in June
   with a programme of events aimed at visibility, inclusion, and dialogue.

   One of the central events was an online panel discussion titled “Beyond Acceptance: Active
   Allyship for LGBTQ+ Equality”. The panel brought together speakers Panagiotis Pentaris,
   Natacha Kennedy, and Carmen Yau, and was chaired by Andrew Wilkins. The discussion
   explored the concept of allyship within the context of LGBTQ+ rights and equality.

   In addition, Goldsmiths hosted a webinar entitled “In Conversation with Sam Albatros.”
   Sam is a writer, poet, translator, and performance artist, as well as an academic at King’s
   College London. During the session, Sam shared reflections on their work, identity, and
   creative practice.

   Neurodiversity Celebration Week
   As part of Neurodiversity Celebration Week, the EDI Team organised a webinar titled ‘In
   Conversation with Professor Jason Arday’, held in March 2024.

   The discussion featured questions curated in collaboration with the co-chairs of the
   (Dis)Ability Network and was met with significant interest and appreciation, particularly

                                                                                      Page 40 of 46
Equality, Diversity, and Inclusion Report (2024)
Dinah Amuah and Waqar Ali
   given Professor Arday’s distinction as a neurodiverse individual and the youngest Black
   professor at the University of Cambridge.

   Windrush
   In recognition of Windrush Day 2024, the EDI Team hosted Royston John to deliver
   his TEDx Talk; ‘Why Did The Windrush?’

   Royston is a ‘child’ of the controversially titled ‘Windrush Generation’. In the talk, he
   uncovered a deeply insightful journey of how migration shaped the life of a 7-yr old boy
   who is now a 70-yr old man.

   In the screening, Royston shared his personal journey of being taken from Trinidad, back
   to Grenada as a child and then to England some four years later. He unlocked, in a
   remarkably unique way, how this migration phenomenon impacted generations and
   communities. He discussed:

    •   Trauma
    •   Survival Techniques
    •   Love Child vs Abandoned Child
    •   Protecting Parents
    •   Fractures in Sibling Relationships
    •   Healing Strategies


   Following the screening, there was an extensive therapeutic interaction, conversation and
   Q&A facilitated by Royston, and local Caribbean food served with refreshments.

   The event was both appreciated and insightful for guests who either had a personal
   connection to the Windrush event or immigration, and those who were learning about its
   history and profound impact on many generations for the first time. Following on from the
   positive feedback a second event will be held in November.



Objective 7
Develop tools and offer learning and development opportunities to equip and
empower staff to manage and work effectively with diverse groups of people.

Learning and Development
Open Programme

As part of the Learning and Development programme in the 2023-24 Academic year, the
Organisational Development and Equalities team continued to coordinate staff EDI training as
part of its open programme. Between September 2023 - August 2024, 24 staff participated in
‘Implicit Bias’ training, 17 staff in ‘Trans-Awareness’ training delivered by Gendered

                                                                                     Page 41 of 46
Equality, Diversity, and Inclusion Report (2024)
Dinah Amuah and Waqar Ali
Intelligence, 26 staff in ‘Recruitment and Selection’ training, 18 staff in ‘Disability Equality in
the Workplace’ training and 44 in ‘Supporting Staff to Support Students’ training.

30 staff attended ‘Supporting Disabled Students at Goldsmiths’ to support with the RASA
process. Stonewall Equality UK, the foremost organisation for LGBTQ+ rights delivered one
workshop in 2023/2024, which saw 10 staff trained in ‘Introduction to LGBTQ+ Allyship’.

Further to this, access requirements for staff are sought at the booking, confirmation, and
pre-course stage. When considering alternative delivery methods, British Sign Language
(BSL) interpreters and closed caption technology (Otter.ai) were available for staff with
hearing impairments.

Essential Training
Essential training on Recruitment and Selection, and Anti-Sexual Violence continued to be
offered to all staff throughout in the 2023-24 Academic year with 5 courses and 10 courses
offered respectively. This enabled further compliance with the College’s Recruitment and
Selection policy, where all Chairs of Interview panels are required to attend this training and
worked positively towards the Anti-Sexual Violence commitment, to provide all staff with
training on the topic of ‘Sexual Violence and Your Responsibilities’. This training also includes
specific training for those with line management responsibilities.

South East Action Learning

During 2023-24, Goldsmiths participated in the ‘South East Action Learning (SEAL)
programme’. SEAL is an external programme available to academic and professional staff
who identify as women. The sessions use action learning and peer coaching to enable
participants to support each other in tackling complex challenges and issues. The programme
also enables networking with women at other higher education institutions in London and the
South East of England. In 2023/2024, registration was oversubscribed, and all 10 applicants
joined the programme.




Objective 8
As a research-intensive learning organisation, proactively develop an inclusive culture
that promotes equality and values diversity

StellarHE - Strategic Executive Development for Diverse Leaders in Higher
Education Programme

As part of our Research & Knowledge Exchange researcher development programme,
Goldsmiths supported a second cohort of researchers to attend StellarHE- Strategic
Executive Development for Diverse Leaders in Higher Education. The core focus of this
programme is to positively develop and enhance leadership skills for Black, Asian and

                                                                                           Page 42 of 46
Equality, Diversity, and Inclusion Report (2024)
Dinah Amuah and Waqar Ali
Minority Ethnic researchers seeking to progress to senior and strategic level leadership at the
College. The StellarHE programme has been designed in response to the unique challenges
and experiences of Black, Asian and Minority Ethnic staff within the higher education industry.
Evidencing Goldsmiths’ commitment and interest in progressing the work of Black, Asian and
Minority Ethnic researchers at the College, this programme is framed by the institutions’ EDI
and HR Excellence in Research Award action plans with the intention of promoting
meaningful individual and institutional development. The StellarHE programme consists of a
seven-month series of workshops and learning opportunities including Borderless Coaching
and innovative learning methods. The program is aimed to support participants currently at
mid-career level with aspirations to progress to senior, strategic-level leadership.


Integrating EDI into Research

In progressing our priority of embedding EDI best practices into research projects and
structures, this year Goldsmiths’ Research and Knowledge Exchange Department piloted an
interactive workshop exploring what it means to attend to issues around equity, diversity, and
inclusion throughout the research process, from design through to dissemination. This, now
recurring, researcher development training session supports researchers to reflect on issues
of power and privilege and to develop more equitable approaches to delivering each aspect
of a research project. Workshop participants drew on past experiences and current research
to propose new ways of designing research projects, fostering equitable relationships,
attending to researcher-participant inequalities, and improving research governance and
funding bureaucracies.




Objective 9
Ensure that policies and procedures are robust, inclusive, and fit for purpose (both in
terms of design and application) across Goldsmiths.

Policy Review and Equality Impact Assessments

In 2023–2024, Goldsmiths continued its commitment to ensuring that institutional policies and
procedures are inclusive in both design and implementation, reflecting the diverse needs of
our staff and wider community. Integral to this work is the application of Equality Impact
Assessments (EIAs), which serve as a critical tool in identifying how proposed changes to
policies, practices, and procedures might affect individuals with protected characteristics
under the Equality Act 2010.


                                                                                    Page 43 of 46
Equality, Diversity, and Inclusion Report (2024)
Dinah Amuah and Waqar Ali
EIAs help to ensure that decisions made across the institution support our legal and ethical
obligations, particularly under the Public Sector Equality Duty (PSED). This duty requires
public sector organisations to eliminate unlawful discrimination, advance equality of
opportunity, and foster good relations between people who share a protected characteristic
and those who do not. By embedding EIA processes across Goldsmiths, we are able to
identify opportunities to promote fairness and inclusion while mitigating potential adverse
impacts.

Paternity / Co-Parent Leave Policy Review

This academic year, a key policy review centred on the Paternity / Co-Parent Leave Policy in
response to legislative changes effective from April 2024. The revised policy provides staff
with greater flexibility in how and when they take paternity leave, recognising diverse family
structures and caregiving roles.

Key changes include:

     •    Staff can now take either a single period of one or two weeks or two non-consecutive
          weeks of paternity leave.
     •    The timeframe to take this leave has been extended from 56 days to 52 weeks after
          the birth or adoption placement.
     •    Employees must still give notice of their entitlement by the 15th week before the
          expected week of childbirth, but now need to give only 28 days’ notice before each
          leave period.

   These changes promote a more inclusive and supportive working environment for co-
   parents and better reflect the diversity of parenting roles within our community.

   Flexible Working Policy Review

   The Flexible Working Policy was also reviewed to reflect the updated statutory rights
   introduced in April 2024. The revised policy enhances staff access to flexible working
   arrangements and aligns with our broader aims of fostering work-life balance, inclusion,
   and wellbeing. Notable updates include:

     •    Employees are now entitled to make two statutory flexible working requests per year
          (up from one).
     •    Employers must respond to these requests within two months, rather than three.
     •    The requirement for employees to explain the potential impact of their request on the
          department has been removed.
     •    Employers must now consult with the employee before refusing any request.
     •    The qualifying period for making a request has been removed, allowing all employees
          to apply from day one of employment.

   These changes support the creation of a more agile, compassionate, and inclusive working
   culture.

   Equality Impact Assessment: Transformation Programme
   (Workstream 6 – Academic Right-Sizing)


                                                                                      Page 44 of 46
Equality, Diversity, and Inclusion Report (2024)
Dinah Amuah and Waqar Ali
   A major Equality Impact Assessment undertaken during this academic year was
   commissioned by Goldsmiths and conducted by SUMS Consulting as part of the
   University's Transformation Programme. This specific EIA focused on Workstream 6 –
   Academic Right-Sizing, which includes significant structural changes and proposed
   redundancies in academic areas.

   The EIA was delivered in three key phases:

     1. Preliminary data analysis to assess the proportion of individuals with protected
        characteristics within and outside of the academic right-sizing pool.
     2. Engagement with stakeholders including staff networks, postgraduate researchers,
        and the Student Experience Focus Group, to ensure that diverse voices and
        experiences informed the process.
     3. Final data analysis evaluating whether the final redundancy pool showed any
        disproportionate impact on individuals from protected groups.

   This assessment was a critical component in ensuring that the university’s transformation
   efforts uphold its legal and moral responsibilities under the Equality Act 2010. It reinforced
   our commitment to transparency, fairness, and meaningful stakeholder engagement during
   periods of organisational change.

Reasonable Adjustments in the Workplace

During 2021, reasonable adjustments in the workplace guidance was reviewed and
relaunched. The new procedures were developed with input from the (Dis)ability staff
network and aimed to provide clarity for disabled staff and their managers on their rights and
best practice approaches to ensuring an inclusive working environment. The guidance draws
on the social model of disability and encourages colleagues to take an anticipatory approach
to disability equality.

As sometime has passed since the relaunch and Goldsmiths (like many organisations)
has experienced significant staff turnover; it became apparent to the People and
Organisational Development (POD) Team that awareness of the guidance is limited.
Furthermore, when adjustments are identified managers are unsure of the process or
where to obtain equipment or advice.

During this academic year, POD has begun work on actively addressing these issues in
various ways which include:

     •    Reminding Line managers of the guidance
     •    Seeking to raise the awareness of the guidance more widely
     •    Providing specific information on where to get equipment and advice
     •    Running workshops for line managers to assist them in supporting staff who require
          reasonable adjustments
     •    The guidance is supported by a ‘Workplace Adjustments Agreement’ form which aims
          to support conversations between a staff member and their line manager about
          reasonable adjustments.



                                                                                       Page 45 of 46
Equality, Diversity, and Inclusion Report (2024)
Dinah Amuah and Waqar Ali
   As part of the Staff Engagement Plan (2024-2027), work will be ongoing to update the
   Reasonable Adjustments guidance as part of Goldsmiths Policies and Procedures.




Objective 10
Be proactive in combating discrimination, bullying, harassment, and victimization at
Goldsmiths.

Against sexual violence training

As part of Goldsmiths ten-point plan to address sexual violence, harassment, and
misconduct on campus we continue to deliver the staff ‘Understanding Sexual Violence and
Your Responsibilities’ essential briefing session and ‘Understanding and Responding to
Sexual Violence’ session for line managers and Senior Tutors. As of April 2025, 64% (up
from 52% at the start of 2022) of current staff had participated in Against Sexual Violence
training and during 2023-24 183 members of staff attended either the essential briefing line
manager or Senior Tutor session.

Review of procedures for reporting racial discrimination and harassment

In partnership with the Students Union, the Race Justice Project Officer initiated a project to
review procedures for reporting racial discrimination and harassment.

As planned for the 2023-24 academic year, the Report and Support was expanded to include
Race Discrimination or Racism as part of the reporting categories in September.




                                                                                      Page 46 of 46
Equality, Diversity, and Inclusion Report (2024)
Dinah Amuah and Waqar Ali
