Categories

podcast

Podcast: Episode 2

-  Post author [] By Chris
-  Post date [] March 22, 2022
-  [] No Comments on Podcast: Episode 2

The second episode of the Ruling Passions Project’s podcast is now live
on the podcast page, and also on spotify and apple.

you can Subscribe to the podcast here

[]

In this episode I talk to Jason Arday (he/him) about his love of music
and how it has helped him understand the world. Jason was diagnosed
autistic at 3 years old. He has recently been appointed professor of the
sociology of education at the university of Glasgow. In our discussion
we touch on a range of topics including race, autistic masking,
vulnerability, intrinsic / extrinsic motivation, expectations of
academia and the importance of music.

[Ruling Passions: 2. A discussion with Jason Arday cover]

[]

Ruling Passions: 2. A discussion with Jason Arday

·Ruling Passions

Additional mulitmedia links and transcript available below…

Additional links for this episode are here:
https://shu.padlet.org/dscb18/9vuzwdgrah4npk4r

[Made with Padlet]

Episode 2 Transcript

INTRODUCTION Welcome to the Ruling Passions Podcast. This podcast forms
part of a research project with the same name which seeks to explore
autistic adults’ passionate interests from a socio-cultural perspective.
I’m Chris Bailey, an autistic senior lecturer and researcher from
Sheffield Hallam University and across a series of episodes I’ll be
reflecting on aspects of autistic lived experience in relation to what
are often called autistic ‘special interests’. I’ll be talking to other
autistic people about their own interests, in order to illuminate the
complexity and diversity of autistic culture.   You can find more about
the project itself by going to the website at
www.rulingpassions.wordpress.com

CB: [01:06] Okay,  So I am really excited to welcome today’s guest, who
has managed to take some time out of their busy schedule to join us.  So
I will let them introduce themselves.

JA:  [01:13] Hi Chris, thank you so much for having me in, it’s an
absolute honour.  My name is Jason, Jason Arday.  I (try to be!) a
Professor of the sociology of education at the University of Glasgow and
I feel very fortunate to be on this podcast and I’m just really looking
forward to talking about things outside of, in some context, work.  I
mean the stuff that I’m known for doing is I guess stuff around race and
racism and stuff but I think that there is a lot of context.

[01:44] What is always interesting about race researchers is that they
are always confined to just that one thing, and it would be good to talk
about other things, because racism isn’t my hobby.  There are other
things that I find a lot more interesting than kind of challenging
racism all the time.   That’s not to trivialise it, it’s just to say
that we all have identities and things that compromise those identities
and I think that it’s always important to explore that in its fullest
capacity with the opportunities provide themselves, and very often
people who do a lot of race work are not really given those
opportunities, if that makes sense.

CB: [02:19]  Yes, and I think talking about things that go beyond our
academic work and lived experiences I think can tell us quite a lot
about people really.  So I asked you to take part in this having
recently seen that you’ve talked a couple of times about being
autistic?  As far as I’m aware that is only something that you’ve very
recently started to talk about.  Is that correct?

JA:  [02:41]  Yes, yeah, it is recent and I never spoke about it because
I didn’t want to be judged about it.  It’s weird how one conceptualises
the thing, you don’t want people to think that you’re making excuses and
stuff, and also I just knew that there was a lot of things, if I said
it, I felt it worked to my disadvantage.  So I kind of waited for an
opportunity, which you don’t know by the way, when you’re making those
kinds of choices, but I thought if I get established or do well, which
as narcissistic as we all can be, particularly academics, but you don’t
ever think that you’re going to do well in this.  Or at least I didn’t. 
I just thought I was going to work as hard as possible and you arrive at
the situation and then you kind of start thinking-

[03:26]  I mean, look, to be quite honest with you Chris, what ends up
happening is people start asking you a lot of questions, so I hate
socials, I am quote elusive, quite hard to get hold of, and we work in a
sector where self-promotion is a thing and a lot of people spend a lot
of time self-promoting what they do and each to their own, but it’s not
something I ever really did.  

[03:53]  Part of that creates a mystique, in other words, without
glorifying it in any way where people don’t know a lot about you, so
they want to know stuff about you, and so people become more intrigued. 
They want to know more about how you got to where you got to, because
not everything is out there and I don’t put all my papers and stuff-   I
don’t do any of that stuff.   So like people kind of hear ‘Jason does
this kind of stuff, I hear he’s okay’ and stuff like that and you get
asked more and more questions and so inevitably there comes a point
where people are able to – they try and put two and two together for
certain things and so the perception is that I probably, my trajectory
to this point, I’ve done it in a very short amount of time, but then
part of disrupting what the narrative might be around that is kind of
trying to set people straight, because I think that historically when
people kind of achieve professorship really, really young or they become
senior very young, there is this idea that they’ve kind of climbed the
career ladder in a very specific way and they’ve had a lot of advantage
and privilege and if I had had that I would be the first to have said
it.  But I haven’t, and so part of that is that you are then sort of
cornered into a situation where you have to explain to people actually I
was diagnosed with autism at the age of 3.  I learned to speak when I
was 11 and I learned to read and write when I was 18 and then in 12
years I’ve got a PhD and so you’re forced to have to explain it to
people because in the end, in some ways, they make these kinds of
judgements about how you got to where you got to and then when they kind
of hear they’re like ‘I had no idea’.

[05:30]  You don’t do it for people to kind of eulogise how well you’ve
done, but it’s important to give people an accurate kind of story and so
part of it is serendipity that it happened at this time, you know, in
the last two years or so where people started finding out about the
autism thing, but it was hard enough being black, so I wasn’t going to
kind of throw in autism to the mix as well.

[05:58]  And like I said, if you don’t put yourself out there and people
just kind of hear about this kind of mythical character, they do want to
find out he doesn’t do any of these things, why is he like this, how did
he get to-   And bit by bit, you tell people bits and bobs with the
biggest thing being I’m autistic and have been, at least as long as I’ve
known since I was 3.  So 33 years of my life.  I’m 36 but I guess I’ve
known since I was 3.

 [06:32] So that is a very different existence, and obviously
navigating, I have always said that navigating racism is difficult but
for me, being autistic, if you can believe it, is probably a thousand
times harder because of how I understand things or the difficulty that I
have in understanding things.   I always say to people ‘Imagine being in
a situation where 90% of the time you don’t understand what’s going on’,
and so in many respects you’re faking it until you make it.  You don’t
understand what’s going on but imagine saying to a line manager or
saying to someone ‘I don’t get it’ and they explain it to you again and
you are forced into submission.

[07:10]  It’s hard enough being black, but if you turn around and say
you don’t understand something people will just think that you’re not
competent.  So the judgement they make on academics of colour, globally
speaking, but let’s just talk about British context, is that they’re not
as competent and that is situated in racism, right?  Now you add the
autism bit to it as well and, do you know what I mean, it’s even worse. 
So a lot of the time, someone says something to me or I’m chairing
something or doing something and it’s like ‘Do you understand?’, yeah,
but it’s the biggest lie of told in my entire life.

[07:43]  When I teacher said to me at school ‘Do you understand what’s
going on?’ as a general rule of thumb very rarely do I understand.   The
only time I do understand things, funnily enough, is when it’s special
interests.

CB:  [07:54]  Yeah, yeah, yeah.

JA:  [07:56]  I have a perfectly clear understanding of that.  But I
guess in the real world that knowledge about those things is absolutely
redundant and useless in relation – in terms of how other people may
perceive it, in terms of what I actually do in my day job.

[08:10]  So a lot of it is learning algorithms and patterns and that is
where the autism thing becomes massively advantageous, because
algorithms and patterns is something that works hugely well to my
advantage.    So once I’ve got the algorithm and the pattern of
something then I can replicate it effectively well, but in that initial
middle stage I don’t have a clue what that is because my brain hasn’t
computed what the algorithm of the pattern is yet, you know?

CB: [08:36]  Yes, that is very familiar to me, what you’re saying is
very familiar.  The sense of not understanding what’s going on but not
being able to communicate that because what you’ve talked about there,
like talking about being autistic, it kind of leaves you vulnerable, I
guess.  Doesn’t it.  Because you are admitting certain things to people
especially if you’ve not admitted those earlier in your life or your
career or whatever, so having now gone through that process of telling
people, how has that worked out for you?  How do you feel about that?

JA:  [09:12]  Yeah, it’s not any kind of massive sense of relief.  I
mean all it’s done is kind of probably put in to focus the magnitude of
the achievement, and not necessarily for myself but for other people who
may have thought that – you know, I probably went to a Russell Group,
you know, got a studentship, went on to a PhD and you know, went
post-doc, seamlessly went through.  Because generally speaking, if you
become a professor at 35, 36 that is what would have happened.  The
quickest amount of time you can do it, unless you’re a child prodigy is
probably 34, 35, 36.  So I’m 36 and that is a presumption that people
make, but then there’s no, 7.5 years ago I had a night job at
Sainsbury’s to make ends meet.  I had a cleaning job in the city, in
London. 

[10:07] I didn’t have that, and I began as a PE teacher and the journey
that I’ve had has been uniquely different.  The only thing that, like I
said, worked to my advantage is the ability to gain the pattern, and the
algorithm, and then to obsess over it, so once I learnt how to write
papers and apply for research grants and all the things you need to do
to be an academic, you align that with being very obsessive and being
able to function on an hour’s sleep for like ten years and this is the
result.   But then the end product is that actually, like a sense of
jubilation you may think that one may feel at doing something like that
you don’t, because what you do feel is exhausted and you feel this sense
of numbness that it is very hard to explain.  It’s hard to explain
because the interest comes from learning the pattern and the algorithm
as an autistic person and you get to the point where you master it and
you lose interest.

[11:08] Which sounds like a weird thing to say to people at this stage
of maybe my career but it’s been harder now since I got, you know, being
absolutely candid, it’s been harder to motivate myself now since I got
the professorship.  It’s been a lot hard to motivate myself now because
in some ways the fun part is learning the algorithm and the code and
once you learn that, the buzz in some ways kind of goes.   I’m not a
sociologist by training but I trained myself, yeah, so I have always
been obsessed.  Like one of my main things as a kid, when I was 14, I
wanted to dress like Paul Weller, and Oswald Boateng, and basically from
that age I’ve been obsessed with tailoring, and the reason why I’m using
this as an example is that is something that I never lost any interest
in it. 

[11:53] I don’t have any vices, but it’s the thing that I know like the
back of my hand, and I love more than anything.  Even more than like
football or sport or whatever.  And you don’t lose interest in something
like that, and I guess what I’m trying to discern now in my autistic
brain is that intrinsic love for something like that is very different
to the extrinsic love for doing stuff around race.  And it is extrinsic,
because you don’t wake up when you’re a kid and say right, I want to be
a leading researcher on race when I’m older.  I don’t think that any kid
has that ambition.  I think that you have that ambition, I had that
ambition in my early 20s, but it’s different now and that has come from
an intrinsic place.  I suppose when you’re there it’s very different and
also people look to you in a very different way.  Because a lot of
people don’t always know the autistic thing.  They look to you as
someone who has all the answers to everything but like a lot of my
answers are situated in my autistic brain and how I make sense of
things.  Even the music stuff.  All of my papers are named after song
titles.  Surely because there is a link between music and how I make
sense of my autism.

[13:03]  But that is something that people don’t know.  But I guess now
things start to become clearer to people once you start unpacking and
they start learning these things.  Like right, so this is why he talks
like this/this is why he has these kinds of things.  So like repetition
for me is like a big thing.

[13:18] Another thing that kind of coincided with getting the
professorship last summer, I mean I don’t know how it is for you Chris,
but like as I’ve got older I am finding it harder and harder to
understand my autism and my autistic brain.  There are certain things in
my autistic brain, like there are certain things in my head that are
becoming more fixed.  I feel like when I was younger, and I know that
people say that this happens as people get older, but like there are
certain things.  I don’t know if it’s a stereotype of not or a
description but they talk about autistic people having sometimes a
rigidity of thought.  Now I don’t think that’s exclusive to autistic
people but I do think that is a common facet of autistic thinking.  It’s
weird as how I’ve got older, it’s like I’m fighting against myself more
to sit within that rigidity. 

[14:03]  I’m becoming more fixed in my ideas and when I was younger, I
don’t know why but it was maybe because of some of the behavioural
training I had for 25 years or whatever it was to not think like that,
and maybe I’m getting in to a phase in my life where I don’t have that
training as much anymore, so my natural autistic behaviours are probably
coming out even more but you only have the privilege of experiencing
that in private right, because when you’re in public you mask. 

CB:  [14:26] Absolutely.

JA:  [14:29]  So you mask a lot of these behaviours and that for me as a
process is becoming more difficult and it’s becoming more exhausting. 
So where I’ve done it my whole life, it’s very different to code
switching in relation to race or class.  This is very different.  This
is very different.  Some of my natural behaviours that I might want to
display as an autistic person, I’ve strangulated it.  The only time I
can actually really behave like that in all honesty is not even in front
of my kids of my partner.  It’s actually when I’m purely on my own, you
know.

CB: [15:00]  Yes so what you’re talking about there is that masking,
isn’t it.  that kind of being, well, the idea of being yourself in front
of people and even knowing what yourself is, because you’ve either,
through self-censorship or self-control, because you know you shouldn’t
be a particular way, or whether it’s because society has told you that,
it’s really hard to adjust that isn’t it, and be someone who you know
really you’ve spent your whole life being told that you shouldn’t be.

JA:  [15:33]  Yes, and it’s a difficult thing because, you know, for me
you learn that.  You learn that, and what you learn to do is you learn
to be able to perform I guess not through my own design, but I think
that autistic people, particularly in the Academy, you learn to perform
to a very high level. It’s a performance.  And you do it to a very, very
high level and it’s very different to even doing it from the context of
race or gender.  It’s very different.  The Jason that’s at work is very
different to the Jason that’s at home.  I know that sounds like an
obvious thing to say for people but it’s different in that level of
concentration I have to apply to everything that I do.  That in itself
is actually quite unnatural, you know, it is unnatural because I don’t
concentrate that hard when I’m doing anything else.  Like for me at
work, the one thing I am always obsessed with is accuracy.  I know that
if I am not accurate in what I do it could be consequential in terms of
how people perceived me.  And I’m not talking from a race lens.  I’m
just talking from an autistic point of view.  If I added race to it then
it would be even worse, but just from an autistic point of view it’s
very difficult.  Even something like an email is painstaking and it can
take me sometimes 5 hours, to send what essentially is a 200-word email.

[16:50]  But in my mind, because it’s not perfect and not accurate, you
know, and if you’ve got 30 emails to reply to in a day then that is
hugely problematic, you know. And I guess people get this sense of
frustration as well, because they’re kind of like ‘I needed to hear from
him today and he’s given this to me 30 hours later’.

CB: [17:12]  And that is the expectation of the modern workplace, isn’t
it.  We have these tools that connect us but people expect those
responses immediately, because it’s possible to give a response, because
the technology makes it possible to give a response.  We’re expected to
comply with that and be as instant as the technology but our brains
aren’t made that way, to be able to enable us to do it all the time.

JA:   [17:37] They’re not and listen, it’s not exclusive to
neurodivergent people either.  that is composite of everybody, but I
just think that neurodiverse people experience that in a very unique
way.  You know, sometimes it’s like this crescendo in my head and I
can’t explain it but I always say it’s like – you know when you’ve got a
really dodgy car and you put the key in, [car start up noises] it’s like
eventually [engine noises] and it starts.  That is kind of what it’s
like and a lot of times, when you – for me, when I have that delay and
the brain is working very, very slowly it’s very frustrating.  If people
get frustrated with me they won’t get more frustrated with me than I
will be with myself when my brain can’t do something very simple as to
send a 200-word email in 5-10 minutes.  It’s really frustrating, but I
guess what people don’t understand is that when my brain is doing that,
which is actually quite often.  I can’t make it do any quicker than
that.  I can’t make it do better than what it’s doing but imagine trying
to explain that to a line manager or – you know, academic is pretty
apathetic, it doesn’t really care about stuff like that.  So imagine
trying to explain that to someone.  Even a student.  These are things
that, because of how societies and how higher education is, these are
not things that we account for.   So you learn to mask it.   You learn
to find ways, in some respects of faking it.  Finding ways to get
through it.  finding a pattern of language to get you through, which
kind of-

CB: [19:17] That formula?

JA:  [19:18]  Yeah, authenticity, you know, it strangulates the ability
for people to be vulnerable because you learn the pattern, and that’s
what I mean.   When you learn the pattern I think what you compromise is
the authenticity and that is something that I don’t think that people
always think about when they’re not taking into consideration how people
may engage with certain things.  I think that it is just deemed straight
way as being incompetent or not being organised or not being diligent or
proactive.  Not all is all it seems and I think that sometimes we would
all do well to remember that. 

CB: [19:53]  Yeah.

JA:  [19:54]  But because we don’t talk to one another and we have this
ridiculous standard that we want each other to attain to, sometimes we
don’t realise.  I don’t think that people would ever realise how
difficult I find academia.  I find it incredibly difficult but I think
the perception is that because I’ve done what I’ve done, that I find it
easy.  Yes, believe me, it’s very difficult.  Particularly because of
the way that I process and understand things, for it to work it means me
basically working 20 hours a day and now that is something I wouldn’t
advise anyone to do.  And that’s because I might be told something at 9
o’clock which makes perfect sense to everybody, but by 2am in the
morning my brain has only just worked out what it is, or maybe the next
day.  You know, and that’s a difference of 20 hours when someone may
want something done within the next 3 or 4.

CB: [20:47]  And that sort of workload is incredibly hard to sustain in
terms of health and family life and yeah, your own wellbeing, isn’t
it.   So the challenges of academia, and working life generally, not
compatible with autistic thinking.  I guess it’s really hard to know
what to do about that, isn’t it, when you’re in it.  For me, part of it
has just been having those conversations like this I guess, and talking
about it.

[21:16]  I got to a point where I was like I just need to say I am
autistic and this is hard, and there came a point where I just couldn’t
carry on doing things as I had before. 

JA: [21:27]  Chris when you did it, how did you feel?

CB: [21:32]  Oh well, for me my story is a bit different to yours
because I wasn’t diagnosed until I was older.  I wasn’t diagnosed as a
kid and I kind of worked on the presumption that I was autistic for
several years.  Then essentially I had a bit of a breakdown and that led
me to seek a diagnosis.  Seeking the diagnosis and getting the diagnosis
felt really powerful for me because it confirmed why I was struggling
with some of the things you just talked about.    It also felt like a
bit of a turning point in that I’m not going to carry on doing things as
I’ve done them before, because I can’t, because it makes me unwell.

[22:16]  So for me it’s been a very positive thing, because it’s helped
me make changes.  For me it’s been very positive, but it is a very
different trajectory to yours because you were diagnosed so much
younger, so you’ve lived with that knowledge through your life, but
you’ve also lived with other people knowing that and therefore that is
going to have impacted on how they expected you to be, not to mention
the intersections of race and all the other differences that you’ve
experienced in your life compared to me, but specifically talking about
the autism diagnosis and talking about it has been very positive for me
really.

JA:   [22:52] That’s brilliant.  That is so great to hear because I
guess the thing about being diagnosed as a kid, which in my case will
have been ’89, no, ’88, because I was born in ’85, is that when you’re a
kid, you become defined by that.  So it’s like you’re the autistic kid,
because you end up going to-   I went to the special school and you
spend pretty much all of your time outside of the classroom and you’re
othered in a very different way, as in everyone knows that you’re
autistic and you know you’re autistic.  Do you know what I mean?  There
is no getting away from it.

 [23:37] So in some respects, your adolescent and formative experience
is interesting because obviously everyone wants to try and be cool with
me but I guess I didn’t have that opportunity but what it did lend
itself to is that I spent a lot of time on my own as a child because I
was always in isolatory environments in terms of learning spaces, and I
spent a lot of time with adults and what it did do is it prepared me
very well for being an adult in terms of how to speak to adults, how to
be around adults, and it allowed me to become very comfortable being in
my own company and become comfortable with myself.

[24:13]  So at that age where people want to fit in and where it’s a
period of discovery and all those kinds of things, and for a lot of
people part of that period of discovery is conforming, because I spent
so much time on my own I didn’t have anything to particularly conform
to.  So I became very comfortable with myself and it meant that the
things I was into were the things I was in to, and I very much followed
the beat of my own drum in that regard and when I say I didn’t try and
fit in it wasn’t like an act of rebellion.  There was nothing to fit in
to because I had spent so much time on my own.

[24:44]  In terms of school, where that becomes a social space for
people to find those synergies and fit in, it proved massively
advantageous because I didn’t ever really care too much what other
people thought and I had a particular way of doing things which I was
always like as long as I’m true to myself, and that’s great, and I think
that the way that I’ve gone about my academic career is probably very
different to other people because I guess, like I said, the biggest
currency in academia is self-promotion and I think that a lot of people,
for good reason, and I get it, they seek a lot of validation from what
other people say about their work or what they say about them as an
academic and I get it.  I understand why that is the case because
academia is all about that but actually it’s not something I’ve ever –
there are mechanisms you would put in place to gain that validation and
one of them being self-promotion and I’ve not done that.  I don’t put my
work out for people to see.  Because I’ve always been comfortable in
knowing that if people are supposed to stumble upon it they will.

CB: [25:49]  And people find it.  People definitely find your work.  And
I’ve found your work, particularly the Cool Britannia and Multi-Ethnic
Britain, the book.  I loved reading that and I’m guessing part of the
topic of that would be something being music and your experience of
growing up during the cool Britannia period and liking certain music. 
I’m guessing that music might be something you would associate as what
we might call special interest or focused interest or whatever.  Am I
right?

JA: [26:21]  It was huge, so like for me, I really wish I was an adult
during that period.  They say it was like the last great decade.  So the
sixties was like a great decade in Britain because of the Swinging
Sixties and the last great decade was the nineties and I’ve spoken to a
lot of people when I wrote that book and I’ve done quite a few
documentaries on this and I’m doing one for the BBC at the moment on
this particular subject, Cool Britannia, and I think that it was the
last great decade, you know, as Noel Gallagher says, the great and good
all resided in that decade.

[26:50] And the reason why I say that is because there are a lot of
issues associated with that, but if we just focus on the music, just
specifically the music, not the other political context.  You’ve got
these five, white, working-class Mancunians, and they basically decide,
they are kind of the children of like Joy Division, Stone Roses,
Inspiral Carpets, Happy Mondays.  We’re going to take on the world and
we’re going to win.  You know, it’s one thing to be the biggest, as
Stone Roses ambition was to be the biggest band in the city, right, and
they became one of the biggest bands in Britain and then there is one
thing to be like ‘Right, we don’t want to be the biggest band in the
city, or in Britain, we want to be the biggest band in the world’ and
for two years Oasis were the biggest band in then world.  Do you know
what I mean? 

[27:36] And when you’re a council estate kid, and you take race out of
this, which is the one time I will actually do that, and you just look
at five working-class kids from a council estate who take on then world
and win, as a 13, 14-year-old that is a big thing.  When you’re in this
concrete jungle and you’re thinking how do I get out of this, they did
it and you kind of think ‘Well I can do that’, and the first time I
heard the opening chord to Cigarettes and Alcohol it was like this
crescendo coming through my TV at home.  And we had cable, and there was
this music channel called The Box, music television you control, that’s
what they used to call it, and I remember the first time I heard it, I
don’t know what it was, like whether it was the stolen chords from T-Rex
or whether was just like-   So Get It On, the T-Rex song Get It On,
that’s where they stole it from, so it’s that opening bit where it’s
like [sings intro] and obviously Noel Gallagher stole loads of like kind
of chords and riffs.  Morning Glory, for example, he stole that from
REM, (This One Goes Out) To The One I Love. [sings intro].

CB: [28:44]  I don’t think that I’ve recognised that before but yeah,
absolutely.  Yeah, yeah, yeah.

JA:   [28:46] I guess that’s where the special interests come from
because you listen.  Because I love music so much, so you kind of see
where they kind of borrowed from, and even Don’t Look Back in Anger,
that is stolen from Imagine, from John Lennon.   So I guess when I heard
all of that it just did something in my mind and then you kind of have
like Paul Weller who is like, at this point he’s in the doldrums with
the years after Style Council and then comes back with kind of like a
self-titled album, the Stanley Road album and he has kind of got a song
like Changingman, which is completely biographical, and for me, like
school doesn’t make sense to me, people don’t necessarily make sense to
me, all these educational behavioural psychologists don’t make sense to
me but when I hear songs like that everything becomes crystal clear.  I
know what I want to be, and I know what I am.  And it’s the only time I
have some-   You know, people can talk to me and I don’t have no sense
of what they’re saying, but I hear those songs and I hear lyrics like
‘You can wait for a lifetime to spend your days in the sunshine’, or,
you know, ‘but when it goes on top you’ve got to make it happen’, and
the only thing I hear is ‘got to make it happen’.  and those things make
more sense to me than a human being saying to me ‘Jason, you need to
knuckle down in school’ and it’s like well, I can’t, but you’re right.  
… knuckle down in school, you know.

CB: [30:04] And the way that you’re talking about it, you know it’s the
sound of it, it’s the kind of social and cultural meaning of it because
you’re talking about Oasis and who they were, but you’re talking about
the sound of those chords, and you’re also talking about the lyrics, and
those kinds of things coming together and making sense.

JA:  [30:26] Yeah, I don’t know.  For me it’s like sometimes you have
this dull fuse in your brain, that there’s a light there but it’s a dull
light, a flickering light, and then sometimes you just get this kind of
firework explosion where everything becomes so crystal clear.

[30:43]  I’m not promoting drugs on this but like a lot of psychedelia,
particularly in the 60s, when they talk about taking LSD and things like
that, they often talk about these portals in their mind that opened in
terms of colours and I don’t drink, smoke, or do drugs.  I’ve never done
any of them, but I have always been interested in psychedelia and why
those artists at that time were so creative.  A lot of the reading and
paraphernalia and the obsessions I’ve had with that, the other stuff
that always comes out is this idea of kind of these kinds of chemicals
opening portals in their minds and it can be through recreational drug
use or through sounds and stuff like that.  For me it’s very much
sounds.  It’s sounds.  The things that I hear.  And for me, when I first
heard Oasis, it was like – particularly that Definitely Maybe album, it
was like a chord going off in my brain.

[31:36] And, by the way, it still is.  I have listened to that album
probably once a day for probably 20 years straight, if not longer.  So –
because it all still makes perfect sense.   People have things that
centre them, yoga, spiritual retreats, a glass, half a bottle of wine.  
For me, listening to that album gives me a sense of where it all started
and where I’m going.   And look, Liam, and Noel, politically speaking
there are a lot of things that they say and have done that do not align
with the kind of society that we want to live in, but if anyone looked
at any musician through that particular lens, I’m not sure how we would
listen to.

[32:20] So, for example, the most sampled person in history is James
Brown, but James Brown, if you put James Brown in today’s society, James
Brown as no place in today’s society because he physically and violently
abused a lot of the partners he was with.

CB: [32:37]  Yeah, yeah.

JA:  [32:39]  Now we could turn around and say you should cancel James
Brown, which arguably you should, but the truth is that he’s still the
most sampled artist in history, so with these things sometimes can you
separate the artist from the music?  I think in extreme cases you should
always do that, but I think that like Morrissey, the argument with
Morrissey.  Morrissey has some interesting views that I for one do not
share.

CB: [33:06]  The same.

JA:  [33:08]  But when I hear This Charming Man, do I think that is one
of the best musical arrangements ever?  You know, is there a person who
doesn’t know that opening tenet.  Everybody knows it when they hear that
jangly riff by Johnny Marr.    So these kinds of things sometimes,
you’re in this kind of strange dichotomy where it’s like my politics do
not align with that individual, but then you go back to that 14-year-old
and you think what was it that drew me to those people?  It wasn’t
necessarily their political affiliations, it was this idea that they had
and the fact that the lived it, they became it.

CB: [33:44]  You’ve talked a bit about Definitely Maybe and it being a
really important album to you.  Do you think that it’s possible that a
new band or another band could bring out an album now at this point in
your life that would feel this important, or is this about when you
heard it?  Is there something about Definitely Maybe and the time in
which you heard it that makes it so important to you?

JA:  [34:05]  I think it’s about the time I heard it, you know.  there
are other albums that have had the same impact.  Tracy Chapman’s
self-titled album in 1989, which I probably came across before
Definitely Maybe, had a similar impact.   I mean my favourite genre of
music is rock’n’roll, so that is why I probably lent more towards that
anyway.   The Miseducation of Lauryn Hill is one that had a huge, huge
impact on me. A huge impact. 

[34:35]  And the last kind of album that I was really, really moved by,
I mean I like a lot of N.E.R.D stuff but that’s because I love Pharrell
and I just think that he’s an amazing composer of music, but the last
album I was really moved by, in terms of similar to Definitely Maybe was
probably Silent Alarm by Bloc Party.

CB: [34:53]  Yeah, absolutely.

JA:   [34:56] And like for me, when I was 16 I went to this bar, or pub
I guess in Deptford.  At the time it had about five people in it and
this band were playing on the Friday night and you could see the roadies
setting up and kind of the studio hand and then the bank came out, and
you have this kind of quite handsome back man that comes out who appears
to be the frontman, and you’re kind of thinking okay, well this is
interesting, because they were positioned as a rock act is going to come
in and play this Friday and literally he just started playing this kind
of crazy punk riff, you know, which turns out to be Helicopter. 
Subsequently two years later the whole world finds out who Bloc Party is
and Silent Alarm is released and it’s insane.  I think that was the last
album I was properly like ‘Wow, this is massive’, because it won’t be
lost on anyone that the only person that kind of comes to mind in a
British context who was the lead singer of an alternative rock band,
because we don’t talk about this particular person a lot, but I talk
about in the book, you know, Skunk Anansie, AKA Deborah Ann Dyer-

CB: [36:03] Yeah, Skin, yeah, yeah.

JA:   [36:06] She, you know, I remember seeing her at Brixton Academy
and like for me that was another lifechanging moment.  Seeing this, as I
kind of described in the book, this beautiful,  androgenous, Black,
queer woman, in that space.  And in what was a sea of kind of white,
egotistical white mean at the time.   And kind of seeing this black,
gay, man, who completely embodies a different type of masculinity, that
for me was like huge. 

[36:49] I guess as a heterosexual black man it also challenges some of
the dynamics you have in your mind of particular groups of people which,
by the way, I don’t think I needed particularly challenging at that
point in time because I think that I had a very good understanding of
intersectionality even at that age, because of the mother I had, who was
influential on that, but it was huge and that was the last kind of album
I was moved by.

[37:14]  but there are some great kind of albums that have come out
since then, but I think that how music is produced is different anyway,
so like very often now you release hits, you don’t release albums and,
by the way, if you do release albums and everyone gravitates towards the
two or three hits that came out in the charts, so the days of listening
to an album from like 1-12, those days don’t really exist anymore.  So
people don’t enjoy albums in the same way.   I know vinyl has made a
comeback, so I think that people are being encouraged to do that, but
even like-

CB: [37:46]  Yeah, you can probably see my record play and my records
just behind me there.

JA:  [37:49]  But this is it, and I think it’s important.   I will tell
you an album I’ve been moved by now, right now, and it’s a new album,
Tears for Fears new album, The Tipping Point.

CB: [37:59]  Oh okay, yeah, yeah.

JA:   [38:02] Tears for Fears have been around for a long time but they
don’t actually have like a massive back catalogue of work but when they
do produce work it’s unbelievable, right?  And The Tipping Point I think
is a really, really good album.  I think that it’s a really good album. 
So in terms of an album that I’m moved by now, I would probably say
that, at the moment.

CB: [38:22]  I’ve spoken to, and not just on the podcast, but as part of
this project I’ve spoken to lots of autistic people and one of the main
interests that comes up is music.  It seems to be a theme running
through many autistic people’s lives, that intensity of interest in
music, that kind of repetitive nature of listening to the same thing
over and over again, but also what you’ve talked about, that way of
understanding the world through music.  And it’s something that I feel
very strongly myself.  Music has always been my thing and I have always
gravitated to particular lyrics and what I love about your work about
the Cool Britannia book is the way in which you’re so direct about the
way in which you’re understanding of things to do with music.  You even
put a playlist for the book, don’t you.

JA:  [39:09]  Yeah, yeah.

CB: [39:12]  Which I really love that idea.  And, to a very small
extent, in some of my work I’ve included quotes from kind of popular
culture, from Joy Division and stuff, because they are my starting point
for making sense of things.   So yeah, it is really interesting to hear
you talk about that from your personal perspective.

JA:   [39:28] I was going to say, Chris, you know you said Joy Division
is your starting point and Oasis is my starting point, but Joy Division
is yours.  How did you come for that to be?  Because I guess Joy
Division became New Order, right?

CB: [39:41]  Yeah, so Joy Division, see I’ve got a Joy Division tattoo,
Joy Division, because I’m old, and we didn’t have the internet when I
was young, my first experience of Joy Division was through ordering a
tape of theirs through the library, so I ordered a cassette of the album
Closer, and I just remember the day I got it and I was blown away by
just the sound of it, the sound of it and the words.   It was the sound
of it, so yeah Joy Division.

[40:13]  I was also, and still am a big fan of The Manic Street
Preachers and their work is just so dense lyrically.

JA:  [40:20]  James Dean, honestly, he is unbelievable.  It’s funny you
say that, I was talking to someone about The Manic Street Preachers the
other day and we were going through our top five and I said to them,
like I said to them Design for Life is a big one.

CB: [40:33]  Yeah.

JA:  [40:34]  And I said to them, If you Tolerate This, I think that
came out in 98, around 1997, and it also became the melodramatic
backdrop to David Beckham’s fall from grace in ’98, in the ’98 world
cup!  So when they were kind of doing the rise and fall of David
Beckham, that kick out at Simeone, then they kind of had Manic Street
Preachers, that particular song playing in the background, but I don’t
know, I think Manic Street Preachers are brilliant.

CB: [41:03]  There is also the album, Second Toughest in the Infants by
Underworld is just like, like you’ve said about Definitely Maybe, that
is the album that for me, for some reason, it’s that one that I don’t
have it on every day but I will listen to it when I want to kind of –
yeah, when I want things to make sense.

JA:   [41:26] You’re so right about that making sense.  I just thought
that there is only one album that maybe I will listen to more than
Definitely Maybe, or there is two actually, there is Paul Simon’s
Graceland, which is actually my favourite album, and there is Ten by
Pearl Jam.

CB:  [41:43] Oh yeah, okay.

JA:   [41:45] And for me, Eddie Vedder has just got the best voice. 
Ever.  The only person who has got a better voice than Eddie Vedder,
sadly who is not with us anymore is Chris Cornell from Soundgarden, and
listening to that, I just think again the thing with these people is
they are great storytellers and for whatever reason, how they tell
stories to me makes a lot of sense, and even in my childhood, you know,
my biggest, or one of my biggest memories as a kid was my mum reading to
me a lot and then playing Enya afterwards, so I listened to Enya like –
I listened to Enya a ridiculous amount because my mum is also obsessed
with kind of Celtic and Greek mythology, which is why I’m called Jason! 

[42:30] Yeah, so that becomes a big thing, and it’s just so interesting
hearing albums that you engage with and it would be good to hear what
other albums kind of stick out for you.

CB:  [42:43] Well, now, because I asked you that question like is it
just stuff from when you were younger and for me it is a lot like, the
Underworld – I think it was around 94, that Underworld album came out in
94, how old would I have been?  I was born in 78, so 16 or something. 
Maths isn’t my strong point.

JA:  [43:03] Ah you’re still young, you’re still young.

CB: [43:03] Yeah, yeah, I’m young.  So there was the Underworld album
and actually before the Manics got famous there was The Holy Bible,
which was their really dense and quite depressing album, but just – I
clung on to that.  But I find that music becomes important during
intense periods of my life when stuff has happened that has kind of made
life challenging.   And so sometimes it’s like more recent music, like –
so, the pandemic was a thing, as we all lived through the pandemic, so I
kind of gravitated towards certain music.  So there is a bank called
Have a Nice Life, but a couple of their albums have really stuck with me
over the last couple of years, so for me there is all the music from
when I was younger, and a lot of that kind of really resonates with me
still, but it’s also, yeah, when I’m going through something in life. 
Whether that’s when we’ve had our kids, because I’ve got two as I think
you’ve got two kids as well.

JA:  [44:04]  Yeah, two kids, yeah.

CB: [44:05]  So that being a thing, and that being a particularly
emotional thing, so there is albums that were out around those times
that kind of resonate.  One by a band called Chromatics.

JA:  [44:15]  Yeah, I’ve heard of them.

CB:  [44:18] Really good. and I really like stuff by Burial.  So for me
it’s like electronic music as well as kind of indie and rock and stuff. 
But yeah, Silent Alarm is a brilliant album as well.  If that was
released now I think people would just download Helicopter and Banquet
and that would probably be done with that.

JA:   [44:34] Yeah, literally, and they would be.  And it’s a shame
because like I mean look, by the way, when Silent Alarm came out, I
think that those were the songs that were played the most, because apart
from anything else they were used a lot as fills in adverts.

CB: [44:51]  Yes, they were, commercials, yeah.

JA:  [44:54]  And TV kind of dramas and stuff, so they probably did
really well out of that, but I mean the albums that you’re talking
about, it’s just brilliant.  I think finding albums is for me a big part
of the work I want to do kind of  going forward is really around the
impact of music and kind of cultural and autistic experiences, because I
think that it’s an integral thing, you know, and I guess it’s something
that only a couple of people, or a lot of people started cottoning on to
now, but like someone emailed me a few months ago like ‘Jason, can I ask
you a question?  All your papers, I think they’re song titles, is that
correct?’ and I was like ‘Yeah, you’ve only just figured it out?’, so
even like – they’re not song titles for song titles sake, they actually
do fit. 

CB: [45:41]  Yeah, yeah, yeah.

JA:  So the paper ‘No one can See Me Cry’, the mental health paper, that
came about because there was a person I was interviewing at the time who
said Jason, I know you really like REM, and I was like yeah, I do.  They
were explaining to me about how they navigate racism every day and they
were like I always say I have to apply my make-up twice, and I was like
‘What do you mean?’ and they were like it’s so painful the racism I
navigate at work that I go into the toilet, pretty much the same time
every day, sit in the cubicle, cry, then reapply my make-up.  But it’s
that whole thing of I just don’t want anyone to see me cry, so it was
like no one can see me cry.  Like you know that’s the lyric in Imitation
of Life, like ‘Come on, come on’, and I was like, – you know, what was
really interesting is that the person who was experiencing that, you
know, they took the time to explain.  I mean I got it, right, but they
knew how much I loved music and they took time to explain it to me in a
way that actually made sense and it ended up becoming the quote for the
paper, you know, or not the quote, but the lyric.  And it’s like, I
don’t know, the papers – we dream the same-    So it was around racism
and how we all collectively need to be responsible for that, but it’s
like we dream the same dream, and if we want racism to end we all need
to ‘dream the same dream and want the same thing’.    and someone was
like ‘I swear that’s a song’, and I was like yeah, yeah, by Belinda
Carlisle.

[46:58]  These things are always-  It’s deliberate because the idea is
to give people a small sense of how I make sense of things through an
autistic lens, and that lens very much is around music.  I can bring
just about anything back to music.  You know, sport and music are
probably my favourite things on this planet but for me, I could probably
live without sport, and I’m saying just I couldn’t live without music. 
I couldn’t live without music.

CB:  [47:30] Same, yeah, same.

JA:  [47:32] It just helps me make sense of everything around me.   The
other day I was listening to David Gray on Virgin Radio and you forget
how brilliant that guy is.  You really forget how brilliant that guy is
and that song, a lot of those songs that he same in the late-mid 90s,
they all still have the same relevance now.  Like Babylon, like
describing a Friday night out and being high on that type of adrenalin,
it still makes sense now.

[48:06]  I kind of thing of when I’m doing work, the biggest thing that
I think about is will it make sense in like 5-10 years’ time?  So you
try and think about it, not that I’m a songwriter, but you try and think
about it like music.  I can listen to The Jam and I can listen to Paul
Weller talking about Eton Rifles and understand that he’s talking about
white working-class culture.  I can make sense of that.  I can listen to
Going Underground and understand that he’s talking about unions and the
impact of that and I can make that link and I always hope that
everything I write, like the Cool Britannia stuff, in 10 years’ time, if
someone doesn’t have a clue about the 90s it will make sense to people
in a really legible way that is kind of infused with kind of – you know,
I always say you want to try and write like, in terms of outside of
academia, you want to try and write things like a documentary almost.

CB: [49:05]  Yeah, yeah.

JA:  [49:05] And I always think that if that book could be made into a
documentary, which fortunately for me it will be, like you want to be
able to tell that story through that lens.  And I think as academics
there is not a lot of currency attributed to that, not through any
academic’s fault but because of the currency we deal in but I think that
it’s beginning to move in a different direction now.  Mechanisms like
this, how people express their ideas and what they’re doing now, people
are beginning to engage in these things in a different way and there
will come a time in the future where academic papers will serve–   I
think they serve one purpose now, you know, I think people are
gravitating towards mediums like this where they can fully express
themselves because let’s face it, when we produce an academic paper, in
the end what you’re expressing is the views of the reviewers.  You write
something, they tell you that they don’t like it.  If you want it to be
published you reshape it and you do what they want you to do.  That
isn’t freedom of thought when I think of freedom of thought and when I
think of music and how musicians express that it’s freedom of thought.  
What we’re beginning to see is a writing that is actually moving away
from that rigid bind in academia.

[50:14]  I think that people are beginning to be more free in their
thinking so you’re going to see people writing in a more melodic
accessible way that still speaks of traditions of academia but it’s
going to be different in the years to come and I think that is a
consequence of how we actually digest and understand music.  I think
music is responsible for that.

CB:  [50:36] I love that idea of melodic writing. I’ve lost track of
time but I’m going to say let’s draw a close there.  I could talk about
music with you all day but I’ve already taken up enough of your time.

JA:  [50:46]  No, not at all.

CB: [50:47]  And I really appreciate the time you’ve spent talking to
me.  Thank you so much, Jason Arday, for talking to me today.

JA:  [50:56]  Oh Chris, it’s been an absolute honour, thank you so much.

(end)

Share this:

- Share on X (Opens in new window) X
- Share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook
-

Like Loading...

Related

------------------------------------------------------------------------

← Podcast Launch: Episode 1 → Podcast: Episode 3

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Leave a comment Cancel reply

Δ
