by Arun Verma

Comment

7/01/26

The fragile future of EDI demands bold university leadership

In a climate of increasing resistance, Arun Verma and Jason Arday argue
that universities must strengthen their voice to defend inclusion,
equity, and academic freedom

by Arun Verma

Comment

7/01/26

Arun Verma

by

staff

8/10/21

Arun Verma is Professor of Practice at University of London

[]

Jason Arday

by Jim Dickinson

staff

2/01/26

Jason Arday is Professor of Sociology of Education at the University of
Cambridge

[]

Tags

- EDI

Arun Verma

Arun Verma is Professor of Practice at University of London

Tags

- EDI

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Jason Arday

Jason Arday is Professor of Sociology of Education at the University of
Cambridge

Higher education institutions are absolutely critical to enabling
communities, economies, knowledge, and innovation to tackle the most
pressing issues and advance as a diverse society.

Alongside this, universities would not exist if they did not prioritise
and invest in equal and equitable opportunities, access, and connecting
with diverse and intersectional communities across the world.

Upon reflecting on the role higher education has played throughout
history, we know that universities have never played it safe.

Our higher education sector performs an instrumental role in being a
critical mirror to social, cultural, and political narratives.

However, it is challenging to be critical when societal views and
beliefs are polarised, with only some who are able to cultivate
opportunities to build good relations and celebrate differences.

Value and values

It is amongst such divisive rhetoric that there are movements
questioning the value of equality, diversity, and inclusion in
organisations, systems, and society – we make a statement not to
minimise the profession by using the acronym.

The world opened their eyes in 2020, again, to the intersectional trauma
of structural racism, sexism, classism, harassment, bullying,
victimisation, and discrimination, to name some.

The higher education sector “reacted” to impress on society that
equality, diversity, and inclusion would be sustained to protect the
civil liberties of staff and students, who help to ensure that our
institutions play a transformative role in education and society.

Five years on, we find ourselves in a time where equality, diversity,
and inclusion have, in some cases, been absolved into safer initiatives
like “organisational development” and “social responsibility”.

These initiatives can often disguise the goodness of the work towards
equality, diversity, and inclusion rather than champion it to the world.

This is not a new issue for those helping to cultivate a socially just,
fair, dignified, and respectful society. The work of equality,
diversity, and inclusion has always been precarious, and the “academy”
is a microcosm reflective of wider society.

The risk-aversion and caution often adopted by universities as a result
can be performative, rarely penetrating the deep-rooted structural and
systemic problems that permeate the sector.

Another American import

This precariousness is now tested from discussions to end diversity,
equality, and inclusion from across the Atlantic.

While we may feel the physical distance, recent reports highlight that
UK universities receiving funding from the USA have to prove none of
their spend is going towards diversity, equality, and inclusion. This
highlights a level of political interference in the autonomy of
universities not often seen before.

We, as the higher education community, know why equality, diversity and
inclusion matters, so let us look at the data from McKinsey & Company’s
2023 research:

- More diversity in both boards and executive teams, in both gender and
  ethnicity, is correlated with higher social and environmental impact
  scores.
- Organisations in the top quartile for gender diversity are 39 per cent
  more likely to outperform peers.
- Organisations in the top quartile of board-gender diversity are 27 per
  cent more likely to outperform financially.
- 77 per cent of consumers are motivated to purchase from organisations
  committed to making the world a better place.
- Higher levels of ethnic representation in leadership teams are
  correlated with higher financial, social, and environmental
  sustainability across the board.
- A strong link between leadership diversity and a motivated workforce.

Recent research from the University of Oxford, UCL Policy Lab, and More
in Common found that:

“Britons are five times more likely to express positive views about EDI
and that the initiatives are beneficial to them.

Recently, UCL Provost Michael Spence made a public statement
highlighting:

“We are, and were always intended to be, an institution to which it is
possible to bring your ‘whole self,’ to bring your history, culture,
identity, and views of the world, free of arbitrary discrimination… If
we do not, then we run the risk of only poorly serving the needs of this
wonderful, global, and incredibly diverse city – London – of which we
are a part.

In resistance to those wanting to dismantle diversity, equality, and
inclusion in higher education across the Atlantic, Harvard University
released a statement saying that:

“…no government regardless of which party is in power should dictate
what private universities can teach, whom they can admit and hire, and
which areas of study and inquiry they can pursue.

We see some institutions speaking truth to power to safeguard academic
and educational freedom, equitable access, and liberty. It is in this
climate that higher education institutions need to strengthen their
collective voice to safeguard the championing of equality, diversity,
and inclusion that are essential to the civic impact of universities.

It is remarkable that there is resistance to helping create and sustain
a more equitable, fair, dignified, respectful, socially just, and
inclusive society. This is a resistance that exists and appears to be
rising.

For institutions who are yet to re-affirm their commitment to equality,
diversity, and inclusion, we ask these questions – is this what we are
and is this who you want to be?

Share

- Click to print (Opens in new window)
- Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
- Click to share on Bluesky (Opens in new window)
- Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
- Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
- Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window)
- Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
- Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)
- 

- []

Share

- Click to print (Opens in new window)
- Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
- Click to share on Bluesky (Opens in new window)
- Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
- Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
- Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window)
- Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
- Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)
- 

making sense SLOLS 26 side green

View here

by Mark Leach

featured message

18/01/24

post list Latest articles

Art and design schools must act as a system, not a market

by Zey Suka-Bill

Comment

7/08/26

A fresh cost of living crisis is coming for students. You’d never know

by Jim Dickinson

Comment

7/08/26

What teaching academic writing as a discipline actually looks like

by Anna Yeadell

Comment

6/08/26

The absolutism is watered down in OfS’ amendments to its free speech guidance

by Jim Dickinson

Policy Watch

5/08/26

Foundation years prepare non-traditional learners to thrive in higher education

by David Stockbridge

Comment

5/08/26

The Miller judgment draws its line through students

by Jim Dickinson

Comment

4/08/26

Promoting equity in research funding requires collaboration now more than ever

by Rachel Van Krimpen

Comment

4/08/26

Where does the international student deficit really lie?

by Sumeya Loonat

Comment

3/08/26

Some students arrive to find the door to belonging already shut

by Radhika Sharma

Comment

3/08/26

Civic universities need collective approaches to bring students and long-term residents together

by Kate Seymour

Comment

31/07/26

4 Comments

Oldest

Newest

Inline Feedbacks

View all comments

Prof A Non

7 months ago

It’s unfortunate that the article treats EDI and academic freedom as if
they were the same issue. They’re distinct concepts that often run up
against one another. The authors also say nothing about the wide range
of actions and policies that fall under the EDI banner. A clearer
account of what EDI actually includes would make the trade-offs easier
to see—and would help explain the recent pushback, which the authors
seem to find puzzling. Consider, for example, the controversy over
“race-conscious” admissions in the United States, which ultimately led
to a Supreme Court ruling. Is it really surprising that Asian applicants
object to a system in which they need on average higher SAT scores than
other applicants to gain admission to the same university?

A further source of opposition to EDI in higher education is its
tendency, at times, to function as a vehicle for left-wing activism—
training on “white fragility,” initiatives to decolonise physics, and
so. If bold leadership is needed, it is to control the ever-expanding
EDI bureaucracy and to protect universities from internal capture by
politically motivated actors.

Smart public

6 months ago

The public are a lot more savvy than this article makes out. Read the
EDI report commissioned by Oxford and UCL linked in the feature to see.
Support for EDI is highly conditional and a clear majority did not think
spending on it represented good value for money.

Darren Gee

6 months ago

EDI is in direct contravention of academic freedom and free speech
requirements as they are mandated by the OfS, UKRI and ECHR.

Mr D

6 months ago

I couldn’t disagree more with this article. The only reason the US
influence is now being felt in this manner is that people in the UK
have, and continue to be, too afraid to say what they really think and
this era has given them a tiny bit of hope and protection. I’m sure the
authors of the article wouldn’t criticise US influence when it comes to
things like the hysteria around BLM and George Floyd.

There are too many jobs now that only recruit BAME candidates (including
in the armed forces); there are initiatives and funding that only apply
to non-white people, and when you talk about ‘gender equality’ nobody
can really say what that means since many can’t define what a woman is.
How can there be any consideration to gender when we don’t know how many
there are, and what it actually is? Why is it measured in gender and not
sex, which surely is far more useful a reference point?

Worse still, we are in a position where university degrees HAVE to have
social justice built into them, which is appalling considering that
students pay for the ability to become experts in their chosen topic and
not have some EDI initiative rammed down their throats. I’ve worked in
universities for over 20 years, and never have I been more ashamed of
the sector than I am now – primarily for wasting oodles of money on
virtue-signalling nonsense that puts white people at the back of the
line. As a father of two young children, I worry about their future in
the UK and their ability to achieve since their skin-colour (white) is
now becoming a significant barrier to employment and opportunities, with
blatant racism towards white people being disguised with the use of
semantics. The only EDI worth supporting is for disabled people & carers
– beyond that it’s wrong. The push-back is justified

Related articles

EDI evidence requirements are a mechanism of ideological selection

by William Mackesy

Comment

2/04/26

Student success has an identity problem

by Brianah Carter

Comment

27/03/26

EDI and free speech are not opposing forces

by Syra Shakir

Comment

26/02/26

Pronouns, phronesis, and the perils of polite bureaucracy

by Sunny Dhillon

Comment

25/02/26

What the first National Disabled Staff Survey tells us

by Susan Wilbraham

Comment

24/02/26

What not to do about diversity data and REF

by Doris Ruth Eikhof

Comment

6/02/26

Nicola Rollock: Progress on racial justice and equity in higher education is “artificial”

by Nicola Rollock

Comment

10/12/25

How we’re working across London to build a more diverse higher education leadership pipeline

by Darren de Souza

Comment

11/08/25
