                 Southend High School for Girls


Summer Term
                     Gazette




  www.shsg.org          01702 588852     office@shsg.org
   Operation Theatre Live – A write up from the Science Captains




    Year 12 Biology students had the chance to
participate in a live dissection hosted by ‘Operation
           Theatre Live’. This immersive
experience involved collaborating with classmates
  to explore the anatomy of a pig, allowing us to
 examine closely its internal structures. Working
       together, we gained a comprehensive
understanding of the pig's heart, lungs, eyes, head,
  and digestive system. Throughout the day, the
instructor provided detailed demonstrations of the
dissection process and shared fascinating insights
into medicine and human anatomy, enriching our
learning experience. Following the instructions, we
  organised ourselves into groups to conduct the
dissection, which fostered initiative and heightened
              our scientific curiosity.
This experience not only deepened our grasp of the
  A-Level Biology curriculum, but also served as
    valuable preparation for those interested in
pursuing Medicine or other biological studies after
                      school.
We extend our gratitude to Operation Theatre Live
  and the Biology Department for this invaluable
                    experience!
Create Week
During the Creative and Performing Arts Faculty Create Week, students
in Years 12 and 8 worked collaboratively on a Dutch Delftware inspired
project. First, the Year 8 students used cobalt oxide to work on a tile
each to recreate a mural drawn by a Year 12 student, who was inspired
by boats in Leigh-on-Sea. Each student also received an individual tile
to create a delftware inspired self-portrait using the same cobalt oxide
to give that distinctive, recognisable finish. We think you will agree that
the results were phenomenal!
SHSG Success ~ British Dressage Youth Inter Regionals

    Dakota and her pony, Eclipse were selected to
   represent the south and east region at the British
   Dressage Youth Inter Regionals. This is a national
competition where all the best under 25s in the country
                       compete.




SHSG Bake Off Competition

  A huge thank you to all students that took part and producing such amazing bakes for the
       Bake-Off competition. First and second place are shown below for each category.



    Cupcakes          Cookies           Brownies          Celebration Cake   Game Changer

 1st: Priyanka P    1st: Nicole D      1st: Aayah R          1st: Tali S     1st: Francesca R
  2nd: Evelyn D    2nd: Jasmine S     2nd: Georgie D        2nd: Katie A




       The overall winner was Tali S with her showstopper celebration cake! Well done!
Sociology Lunchtime Lecture

Guest Lecturer Professor Heidi Mirza Speaks to Sociology A level students


      As the first speaker in the Sociology A level Summer Lunchtime Lecture Programme,
          in June, Professor Heidi Mirza delivered an online lecture to A level students.
  Profess or Mirza leads on Race, Faith and Culture at Goldsmith University and is the Emeritus
Professor of Equalities Studies in Education at the Institute of Education at UCL. She has worked
      with various Governments to advise on school improvement in areas of diversity and
inclusion. Professor Mirza is a key theorist on the Sociology A level course. She is a leading Black
                             Difference and Intersectional feminist.



Students were interested to hear about her route into academia and experiences as a black female
  academic. She was one of the first black female professors in the UK and she spoke about the
                       sexism and racism that she has faced in her career.



 Professor Mirza spoke about her seminal work 'Young, Female and Black' where she researched
    theexperience of black girls in schools in the 1990s. She also spoke about her more recent
              research on the experience of Muslim girls in the education system.



Hearing from Professor Mirza directly about her research was inspirational for the students and
   really enriches their academic experience. We are very grateful to Professor Heidi Mirza for
                                    giving up her time for us.
Sociology Lunchtime Lecture Programme
                                 Social Science at Oxbridge
Miss Sangha, delivered a presentation to social science A level students explaining the process of
           applying to Cambridge and Oxford to study social science related subjects.
   Miss Sangha spoke about her experience of studying Psychology at Cambridge university.
She told students about the array of opportunities available to them, and how they can prepare
   for the application and interview process. This was a great opportunity for students to ask
            questions and debunk any myths that they may have about the process.
                           Thank you to Mrs Fellowes for organising.

                                   Sociology In Action Trip
              Eighteen A level sociology students attended the Sociology in Action
conference at the Emanual Centre in London. Renowned feminist Professor Ann Oakley spoke
about her fifty-year sociology career and research. At age 79, Prof Ann Oakley, is still working in
     the field, and her research is still making a difference to gender based social policy.
Students were inspired by hearing Professor Jason Arday speak about his experiences breaking
 through in the education system as a young, black, autistic student with global delay. He talked
about his research about ethnicity and inequalities in the education system, and the importance
of celebrating and promoting Black History in the curriculum. He is the youngest ever professor
                                 to be appointed at Cambridge.

                        Sociology Lunchtime Lecture Programme

   Sociology A level students have been visited by a range of guest academics this term, as part of
    the Lunchtime Lecture Programme. In recent weeks students have attended online lectures
    from Professor Heidi Mirza from UCL, Dr Skinner from Bath University, Dr Cecile Menghini
   from Exeter University, Professor Gillborn from Birmingham University and in-person lecture
     from Dr Katy Wheeler from Exeter University. Speakers have lectured on a range of topics
        related to the Sociology A level, including Education, Disability Inequality in Society,
            The Sociology of Consumption and Criminology research into gang crime.
      Year 10 students joined us for the criminology talk as part of their careers programme.

         The lectures have really brought sociology to life for students and are excellent
  enrichment. They have learnt how quantitative and qualitative research is carried out in the
               field as well as the impact of sociological research on social policy.
    In the Autumn term, we look forward to hearing from Professor Louise Archer from UCL
  speaking about her research into social class, gender and educational achievement, Professor
    Steve Tombs speaking about Grenfell Tower, and a representative from Hertford College,
                        Oxford University talking about the PPE course.
 Sociology Lunchtime Lecture Programme
                             Social Science Magazine – Genazine
This has been a successful year for the social science magazine ‘Genazine’. Led by Co-Editors
Tracy and Charlie Wright, the editorial team of sixth form social science students have produced
articles on topics ranging from ‘Understanding The Impact of Sanctions on Russia’,
‘The Windrush Scandal’ to the recent topical question of ‘Should 16 Year-olds Be Given The
Vote’. We also ran a competition for Year 10 Life Skills students on the theme of ‘Youth of Today’
with the winner, Mia Keith having her article published. Genazine articles are read as part of the
registration programme by Year 10 to 12 students, with an opportunity to discuss the issues
raised the article as a class.


Well done to the editors, writers and design team who have worked hard to produce articles of
such a high standard.

Past copies of the Genazine magazine articles can be found on the website here:
Genazine - Southend High School for Girls (shsg.org)




                                      Celebrating Success
National Sociology Competition Winner
The Sociology Department are proud to see Year 12 student, Chinedum Chima, announced as the
Tutor2u National Sociology Essay competition winner. In response to the title 'Is There Value
Consensus in Contemporary Society', Chinedum concluded that in today's multi-cultural society
there is no longer just one set of shared values. The essay explored sociological perspectives of
Functionalism, Marxism, Feminism and Postmodernism and applied theory to contemporary
events such as clapping for the NHS during the pandemic, as well as exploring the impact of
different religious views and considering intersectional feminism.

Chinedum is planning to study sociology at university at both undergraduate and postgraduate
level.
Geography Southchurch Park Trip


         Year 7 enjoyed their first experience of a Geography fieldwork trip
           looking at biodiversity at Southchurch Park. Whilst all classes
       completed the same fieldwork and booklet, each day was very different
            from a soggy Monday morning to a warm sunny Wednesday!
        The students worked hard throughout each morning looking at plant
       species in transects across different sections of the park. They utilised
           plant species guides and the expert knowledge of Mrs Brierley
       and Mr Gilson throughout the mornings to identify the correct names
        of plants ranging from foxtail and common grass, to chamomile and
       spotted medic. They also completed soundscapes, a unique fieldwork
       technique, to see how sound varied across the park. Students will now
       use the data collected in two follow up lessons back in the classroom to
         present and analysing the data they collected against a hypothesis.
           A special thanks to Mrs Brierley and Mr Gilson for their expert
       knowledge, and Ms Spilstead, Mrs Robinson, Mrs Law and Ms Graham
                            for all their help on the trips.
SHSG Amazon GetIT National Final at Amazon UK Headquarters in Holborn

          By Ashlyn C, Elsa K-W and Samriti B

  We went into London to present our final app design
   to Amazon. We worked hard on our mental health
   app design throughout the competition and were
      honoured to be able to compete in the finals
   consisting of the top three app designs in the UK.
     We had so much fun and learnt a lot from this
   experience. The other two teams had amazing app
   ideas: British Sign Language (BSL) and safe navigation. We managed to come second overall
                                 with only a half a point difference.

  It was a great experience and day overall and we feel that we have improved our understanding
  on marketing, designing, presenting and public speaking as well as our confidence. We listened
       to a talk about careers on technology and the under representation of women in this
      department. We would like to thank the CS department for giving us this opportunity,
     organising this experience with Amazon, and allowing us to showcase our app ideas and
                                              abilities.
                               From Mr Highmore and Mrs Chumley

  Our SHSG trio of Computer Science students (Ashlyn, Elsa, and Samriti) performed admirably
   presenting their ideas of an application for smart phones aimed at improving 13-18 years olds
  mental health, with innovative and complex concepts including cloud storage and web APIs to
    store, retrieve and process data. They discussed their wireframe application design of each
  screen, the rationale and research behind the idea, feedback from a variety of sources to refine
                    the idea, and the final application design and walkthrough.

    After the presentation they fielded a range of challenging questions from the judging panel
                     working as a team to discuss and give reasoned answers.

  Their 10-minute presentation was highly praised by a panel of industry leaders from the BBC,
     Amazon AWS and Lego. In the end they were a close runner up to the winning team, the
  feedback they received was extremely positive and this competition is seen as the “World Cup”
  of application development for students, with hundreds of entrants across the whole of the UK.
  Our students participated in a tour of the headquarters with a view of the surrounding London
   city Landscape from the roof which was breathtaking. The Amazon team who hosted us were
  very welcoming and we came back with goodie boxes of AWS hats, wireless headphones, water
     bottles and for the adults AWS socks! As teachers we were so impressed by our students’
  fantastic attitudes, behaviour, innovative ideas, and confidence to present to others at industry
                                          level. Well done!
Science Week




SHSG’s Science week was a resounding success with activities every lunch time. The Computer
   Science captains leading a group of students to build and program a breakdancing robot.

The Biology captains explored the five senses with students looking at how the senses evolve as
                  we age. The Physics captains helped the students to create
       parachutes to protect items dropped from a height. The Chemistry captains and
 students worked together to solve the murder mystery of who killed the Chemistry teacher.
           The week ended with students working in their houses on a science quiz.
   SHSG HOUSE CUP WINNERS 2024 – CONGRATULATIONS TO HERMES HOUSE!

        Students in Hermes House celebrated after being crowned 2024 House Cup Winners
      – for the second year in a row! Hermes beat Athene by 978 points to secure the top spot.
      Mr Carey announced the results in a whole school assembly and presented the trophy to
    Hermes house captains Bolu, Madelaine and Ella. The winning house captains gave a special
    message of congratulations to all students in Hermes and proudly raised the trophy to huge
             cheers. The final standings for the House Cup competition 2024 are below:

              House                                       Total House Points
              Hermes (Miss Ford)                          20893

              Athene (Miss Riebold)                       19915
              Aurora (Mrs Leman)                          18028
              Hera (Mr Boney)                             17960
              Aphrodite (Mrs Bowman)                      17904
              Artemis (Ms Boyson)                         17650


    The winning house took a celebratory trip to Adventure Island Amusement Park in Southend!

                       Thank you to all the Sixth Form House Captains for the
   commitment and energy they have shown in their roles and for organising a range of enjoyable
                              and action-packed whole school events.




               A message from our Hermes House Captains Bolu, Ella and Madelaine:

     “Congratulations Hermes, we are all so proud of how much effort you have put in this year
      entering House competitions and as well as all your individual efforts and achievements.
                    I am so proud to be one of your house captains.” Madelaine

  “I’m so proud of everyone in Hermes for putting in the hard work for this amazing win! Everyone
 always goes above and beyond in the SHSG community, and I’m so pleased to be one of the winning
                             House Captains. Well done Hermes!” Ella

“Everybody wants to know what we would have done if we didn’t win… I guess we’ll never know”Bolu
SHSG HOUSE CUP WINNERS 2024 – CONGRATULATIONS TO HERMES HOUSE!
Essex University Trip

 As part of the continuing Careers education provision at SHSG it is important that we enable
    students to have a hands on experience of what university life may be like. We work in
conjunction with the charity 'Make Happen' who aim to make all students aware of their post 18
 choices. Year 10 had a fantastic day out at Essex University. They had a tour of the extensive
campus from student ambassadors and had a really detailed talk about student life, going into
   details such as the wide variety of societies that are available to how to do ones laundry.
The students got to sit in sample lectures in law and sport psychology. It was a very warm but
inspiring day, for many of our students it was their first experience of a campus university and
                        will give them lots to consider for their future.
Year 12 Royal Holloway University of London – Essay Competition

We visited the Royal Holloway University where we
represented the school for the very first time at their
annual essay competition. For the competition, we had to
create a video and a poster responding to the question
“How can psychologists/psychology promote healthier
working environments in schools?”. After arriving at the
university, we briefly walked around the campus,
admiring the stunning architecture, before heading in
for an introductory talk by Dr Mirta Stantic. After the
talk, the first out of two poster sessions began (which was our session) and we were
approached by judges, including PhD students and professors at the university, who listened
to us present our poster and asked us questions to challenge our psychological brains. In
between the sessions, we had the pleasure of listening to Dr Gemma Northam deliver a talk
on neuropsychology and Professor Jessie Rickets, who considered whether reading could be
considered a virus. We enjoyed these fascinating talks as they linked quite closely to the
areas of psychology we are interested in. At the end of the day, they announced the winners.
Although we did not win, what we came out with was a deeper understanding of the
plethora of careers available in psychology and a sense of pride in ourselves for
participating. The competition was an invigorating experience, and I highly recommend it
for any future psychologists.


Written by Katrina N (psychology subject captain)


Mrs Fellowes and Miss Dunlop had the pleasure of attending the competition with the three
students, Katrina, Ella and Habiba, that had entered the competition. This was the first time
that SHSG had entered the competition and as such, the students had little knowledge in
terms of the expectations and quality of their competitors. The students did SHSG proud
and they were able to show off their knowledge and understanding of the
subject whilst answering the judges’ questions.
One of the professors even lost track of time, he was so engaged in conversation with them.


Well done to all the students that took part.

Written by Mrs Fellowes (Head of department)
Psychology in Action conference
Year 12 Psychology guest lecture

Year 12 psychology students had the opportunity to attend an online guest lecture with Prof
Becky Milne from Portsmouth University. She has a wide array of experience in psychology and
criminology but of particular interest to us was her experience working with the police in
developing the Cognitive Interview to help make eyewitness testimonies a more accurate form
of evidence. Prof Milne has worked not only with police departments in the UK and Ireland but
also around the world including Australia, New Zealand, and Singapore. She has been heavily
influential in researching in this area, but also in writing policies, training the police and she has
worked on several high-profile cases. The students enjoyed hearing about her first-hand
experience in this field and it gave them a real insight into how important psychological research
has been in aiding our understanding of human memory in the real world. Prof Milne was also
able to provide some practical memory revision tips and she has passed on some related wider
reading for students to engage with. We thank her very much for giving up her time and look
forward to hopefully seeing her again in the future.


Planet Action Eco-Sale




   The non-uniform day was an amazing opportunity to receive a huge number of items that
               needed a new home as were surplus to our students’ requirements.
                  The subsequent selling of these items, we raised almost £400.
  This money was split equally amongst three charities working on environmental issues at a
 local, national and global level. We also gave students at the Eco-sale the chance to get a free
 pair of period knickers to try – we gave out over 300! Hopefully, this may give some students
     the opportunity and confidence to try more environmentally sustainable sanitaryware.
      Leftover items at the sale went to Havens hospice in Shoeburyness (books), Rayleigh
             MegaCentre (toiletries) and the One love project had the clothing items.
                                 Therefore, nothing was wasted!



The geography department would like to thank the students, staff and parents for supporting this
endeavour!
Year 8 Rhineland Residential 2024 – Mr Shipton’s reflections
       Year 8 students had their first taste of Germany. They were amazed to find themselves in the
                 picturesque Rhine Valley after a ten-hour coach journey from Southend.

  On the first full day, students immersed themselves in medieval history on a guided tour of Eltz Castle
              asking the guide many questions. The castle refectory gave students their first
 opportunity to practise their spoken German. Two hours later we were calmly being elevated by chairlift
       to the famous Vierseenblick in the hills above Boppard for a spectacular Rhenish panorama.

  On the second day, students climbed the Drachenfels in Konigswinter and learnt of the German sagas
 and legends of the Rheingold and Nibelungen. Later that afternoon, students explored the Deutsches Eck
 in Koblenz peering into the depths of the Rhein/Mosel confluence. There was also time to ride the cable
  car over the Rhine to the impressive fortress of Ehrenbreitstein. In the evening a pilgrimage took place
     in the village where we were staying and our students were complimented on their courtesy and
                       thanked for their support as the procession passed the hotel.

    On the final full day students scaled the Loreley Rock having been enthralled by the legend on our
    approach. A short drive took us to Rüdesheim where we soared above the vineyards in a cable car
   towards the striking monument overlooking the Rhine. Students practised their language skills once
   more in the streets of Rüdesheim taking in the Drosselgasse and impressing many American tourists
   who had descended on this delightful town. Students also got into the spirit of the Euros by wearing
  German flag deely boppers, given out free with every purchase. Our hotel accommodation overlooking
              the Rhine was perfect and taste buds erupted as students tucked into the finest
                           German fayre served every evening in the restaurant.

                         Students behaved impeccably throughout, and staff were
       impressed with their willingness to get involved. All students are looking forward to visiting
                                        Germany again in Year 10.
Mock Elections
  Election fever gripped SHSG. The students formed themselves into Political Parties, elected
 leaders and researched manifesto promises. They worked passionately and tirelessly to cam-
 paign; creating posters, filming Party Political Broadcast videos and canvassing for votes. The
Party leaders especially impressed during the hustings debate. All students voted on Thursday
 4th July and everyone waited eagerly for the results. Like the General election, Labour won a
landslide victory in school and the Labour leader Ruby McGauley gave a stirring victory speech.
 Well done to everyone involved for a fantastic show of democracy in action and thank you to
                                      everyone who voted.




 Year 7      Conservative Party      Labour Party      Lib Dems      Green Party     Reform UK
 Total              23                   100               10            29              10

 Year 8      Conservative Party     Labour Party     Lib Dems       Green Party     Reform UK
 Total               13                  80              5               44              2

 Year 9     Conservative Party      Labour Party      Lib Dems      Green Party     Reform UK
 Total              18                   75              11              30              27


Year 10     Conservative Party     Labour Party      Lib Dems       Green Party     Reform UK
 Total              20                  95               12             24               14


Year 12     Conservative Party     Labour Party      Lib Dems       Green Party     Reform UK
 Total              29                  43               25             28               36
Media Magazine Production Competition 2024

  Safa-Noor M and I recently attended the final showcase for the Media Magazine Production
     Competition 2024. We were fortunate enough to have our short film, “To Be Perceived”
    shortlisted for “Best Drama Short”, and although we did not win, we still found it to be a
   valuable experience that has inspired us for the future. It was amazing to watch everyone’s
  films, the talent was immense, and it was clear there had been a great deal of hard work put
 into all of them. The winners were truly deserved, and it was lovely to talk to some of them and
   feel the level of mutual support that came from everyone. We also gained some very useful
    advice and information from industry professionals, and even connected with people we
  previously shared filmmaking experiences with. We were left brimming with ideas for future
                       short films, and tips on how to take our work further.
Written by Isobel K.
Young Geography of the year 2024
Media Magazine Production Competition 2024
We would like to thank all of our parents, alumni, governors and friends of the school who have
 supported us this academic year in facilitating our careers offer. We have been able to offer
             meaningful experiences in person and online for all of our students.
 You can see reports on all of the experiences that have been offered via our newsletter here.
     Students are able to log all of their careers experiences via the online platform Unifrog
                              that students can access from home.


Unifrog - The universal destinations platform.
We help students compare every opportunity, then apply successfully.
We also empower teachers and counselors to manage the progression
process effectively.
www.unifrog.org


I would like to invite parents, carers and alumni to join us
on Linked in here.


We can not provide high level, relevant experiences that
reflect the local labour market without this support, so thank
you.


We are planning our Careers programme for next year and
would really appreciate support for the following events.


Friday 27th September- Careers Carousel for Year 10.


The commitment for this events would be for a 20 minute talk with an activity repeated six times
in person in the morning only.


We also offer half termly Monday morning online registration talks about careers. These are
offered via Teams from 8.35am to 9. 00am.


Please get in touch and sign up here https://forms.office.com/e/xgauMpccLb or scan this QR
code

If you feel you would be able to commit to help us with one of the following events that serve to
educate our young people about their Careers options.
Media Studies

Into Film:
I first found out about Into Film when I was 7 years old from my dad. His school often ran

competitions or activities related to the organisation, and it got

me very intrigued as to what it was. Into Film is a UK-based

charity, that focuses on using the power of film as a way to

engage and educate young people, whilst also providing
remarkable opportunities for young people in the industry.

Once I had learnt more about them, I decided to apply to
become a member of the Youth Advisory Council and

ambassador for Into Film and was asked many questions about

my love of movies, and what I thought was important about

them. To my delight, I was selected as one of the ambassadors

for London. Currently, I am in my second year, and have been a part of many amazing

opportunities, thanks to Into Film. I have been a part of many Q&As with very famous names in

the film industry (last year we even got to meet Naomie Harris and Barbara Broccoli from the
Bond films!) and got to ask them about their experiences and advice, and often have worked

with companies like the BBC, who want to hear how their resources help children. It’s not all

meetings though, as we have also done things like judge competitions such as the Manchester

Animation Festival, and even had the opportunity to attend premieres for films like the

upcoming ‘Wonka’. All in all, this has been one of the best experiences of my life, and I strongly

recommend to anyone who loves movies as much as me to consider it!


                           By Sitara S, Year 10 (now Year 11) Media student.
Adventure Island Trip




Year 7 Colour Run
Year 7 Colour Run
Minigames Madness! Sports Day
Sports Day
Sports Day
Sports Day
Chicago Portraits from SHSG Year 12’s




     Velma Kelly ~ By Lily. P                            Billy Flynn ~ By Ibadat. S




                                Roxy Hart ~ By Deia. D
Chicago Drawings




                   Mama Morton ~ By Vongai. K




                   Mary Sunshine ~ By Gabriel. B
Chicago Rehearsals
Chicago Write up
Chicago – By Aled C Year 12
Going into Chicago I already had high expectations, Southend High School for Girls has yet to put on a
production that has not exceeded the typical standards of what a school can achieve on a limited budget.
But this being my first experience of Chicago means that I cannot comment on the production’s
accuracy or compare it to other versions, so this article will be reviewing Southend High School for
Girl’s latest musical as a stand alone.

The first element I feel I must comment on is the spectacular costumes and set designs. Roxy and
Velma’s costumes clearly set them apart from the rest of the cast, emphasising their importance in the
narrative. The clothing was often simple yet completely elegant, notably Velma’s dress for ‘All That Jazz’.
The ensemble did not fail to match the bar set by the leads, with period accurate and danceable
costumes. What I especially noticed was the inclusion of a masculine variation that still blended with the
rest of the group, a very difficult endeavour when all bar one of the ensemble were wearing matching
dresses. On a similar note, the set design stunned me. Obviously as a student I had walked past items
like the prison bars in the corridor, but I had not expected it to all come together so cohesively on stage.
I felt fully engrossed in the ‘Cell Block Tango’ and Court Room scene due to their sets and the seamless
scene changes, aided by the directors Safa and Isobel. There was no hindrance on the audience’s
absorption in the narrative (something even professional productions can falter with).

Linking to the professional skills displayed by this school production, the choreography throughout the
entire show definitely deserves mentioning. From the start it was clear the choreography was carefully
constructed and rehearsed down to perfection. During ‘Overture/All That Jazz’ the entirety of the stage
was filled with dancers keeping busy and almost constantly moving. The audience, myself included,
could not help but have their full attention grasped by the stage, constantly having a new person or
action to focus on. The juxtaposition of this with the fluidity of Velma was the perfect kind of whiplash
that truly encapsulated the standout dialogue, “That’s Chicago!” The aerial choreography for ‘Cell Block
Tango’ was completely unexpected and had the audience on the edge of their seats. Whilst not so
extreme, the use of the set as part of the choreography for ‘When You’re Good to Mama’ had me equally
fascinated. The use of the prison bars as a form of prop in the dance was immensely entertaining to
watch as well as ingenious for the students, namely Freya, who choreographed the production.
And of course, I have to finish this section by gushing about the long-awaited duet between Roxy and
Velma in Act Two. The two actresses were perfectly in sync with one another, no easy feat, especially
considering how little time they must have had to practice.

Not only was Chicago tense and beautiful at times, but also downright hilarious. The dialogue in ‘Cell
Block Tango’ had me laughing harder with the introduction of each new prisoner. Standout lines
included, “I fired two warning shots. Two warning shots into his head,” and, “We broke up over artistic
differences. He saw himself alive, I saw him dead.” The humour combined with the deadpan deliverance
was absolutely perfect and I would find it difficult to believe any member of the audience did not find it
funny. Another one of my favourite moments has to be the physical comedy from Billy and Roxy in ‘We
Both Reached for the Gun’. The puppetry motif and choreography reflected the lyrics in the best and
funniest way possible.
Chicago Write up
Now I feel it suitable to talk about the memorable actors, each in their own paragraphs, of course
starting with Roxy. Isabella completely embodied the limelight of Roxy, filling the stage with her
personality. Her vocals never faltered and apart from one dialogue slip-up, her acting was impeccable
for an individual so young. I may not have seen the alternate cast, but I have heard from many that Emily
was as equally talented in the lead role.

Elicia had the most powerful vocals in the production, in my opinion, as Velma. Her performances in
songs such as ‘I Can’t Do It Alone’ and ‘My Own Best Friend’ showed off not only her musical abilities,
but also her grasp on acting. The audience could feel the emotions oozing out of Velma as she lost fame
to Roxy and recounted always being her” own best friend”. As with Isabella’s counterpart, I only heard
glowing reviews for the alternate Velma, Ella.

Didi was the perfect Amos (though I do anticipate equally matched by Jessica). Despite not having the
most lines, I felt the uttermost pity for Amos, especially after ‘Mr Cellophane’ due to Didi’s spectacular
performance. It was to the point audience members found her after the show just to compliment her
on her emotional portrayal. (How I know this, you may ask? My mother did exactly that after the Friday
evening performance, much to Didi’s surprise I must expect.)

Finally, I want to combine Evie and Charlie’s portrayals of Mary Sunshine and Billy Flynn respectively.
Though both amazing in their own regards, having dazzling on-stage personalities and brilliant line
delivery, they complimented one another perfectly to elevate each other. Subtle hints to an affair
between the two characters may have been missed by some without inside knowledge from the cast,
such as I have, but for those who noticed it added another layer of humorous narrative to the
production.

I feel the perfect way to wrap up this article is not with my opinion, as I’m sure by now anyone reading
this can tell I was a fan, but with quotes I managed to grab from some staff and crew on Friday evening:

“It’s so lovely to watch it all from the sidelines, see everyone being happy after doing well, you’ve got to
hype them up” – Isobel (Director + Crew)

“Very fun doing the whole play and it was nice seeing how all our hard work transferred to the
stage” – Safa (Director + Crew)

“It’s been so fun watching this all come together with my friends” – Evie (Mary Sunshine)

“Although I’m not a musical person, I thoroughly enjoyed it” – Tillie (audience member)
  GCSE & A Level Results Day— best ever results!




Please see a small sample of the many success stories of our students’
achievements from our results days on the following pages.
GCSE Results Day— best ever GCSE results!
GCSE Results Day— best ever GCSE results!
GCSE Results Day— best ever GCSE results!
GCSE Results Day— best ever GCSE results!
A Level Results Day—best ever A Level results
A Level Results Day—best ever A Level results
A Level Results Day—best ever A Level results
A Level Results Day
A Level Results Day—best ever A Level results
A Level Results Day—best ever A Level results
A Level Results Day
A Level Results Day—best ever A Level results
DofE Volunteering
200 Club Winners ~ Parents Association



                  There is no limit to the amount
       of draw numbers you can purchase, draw numbers can
        now be purchased at £10 for the 10 remaining draws
                            of the year.

          Email for more info shsg200club@yahoo.com
   Easy to join with ParentPay and online banking for friends and
                               family.

   The PA team raise £1,000s each year to support SHSG with vital
                             projects.

   Volunteers needed – could you spare a few hours once a year.

   The PA can only support SHSG at such events with the help of
                      parents and friends.

        Thank you from the PA Team.




                                                                       £68.30
                   £68.30
                                                                       P. Gent
                   K.Bridge                                   £40.98
  £40.98

  R. Peat                                                   L.Berkum


                                                                                  £27.32
                               £27.32
                                                                                 H.Collins
                              W. Ennifer
Resources ~ Wellbeing Directory




                                                                   Call: Mon-Fri 9.30am-5.30pm
       NSPCC | The UK children's charity
                                                                       03444 775 774
                  | NSPCC
                                                              National charity helping people with
                                                                     Anxiety - Anxiety UK
   Contact trained helpline counsellors 24 hours a
       day by email or online reporting form:
                  help@nspcc.org
                         Call:
    Mon-Fri 8am-10pm & 9am-6pm weekends
                0808 800 5000

                                                          Beat is the UK’s eating disorder charity
                                                     supporting both individuals and families affected by
                                                                      eating disorders.

                                                                  Help for young people
     Young Minds Helpline for parents and young        The Beat Youthline is open to anyone under 18.
                       people.                                 Youthline: 0808 801 0711
     YoungMinds | Mental Health Charity For               Email: fyp@beateatingdisorders.org.uk
    Children And Young People | YoungMinds                            Help for adults
  If there are concerns about a young person’s       The Beat Adult Helpline is open to anyone over 18.
 mental health during this difficult time, you can          Parents, teachers or any concerned
       contact the Young Minds Helplines.                  adults should call the adult helpline.
 Parents Helpline: If you are a parent who needs              Helpline: 0808 801 0677
 advice about your child’s mental health you can          Email: help@beateatingdisorders.org.uk
     contact the Parents Helpline directly on:             The UK's Eating Disorder Charity - Beat
   0808 802 between 9:30am-4pm                                  (beateatingdisorders.org.uk)

          YoungMinds Crisis Messenger:
     If you are a young person experiencing
        a mental health crisis you can text:
   YM to 85258 for free 24/7 support                           Kooth are an online councelling
                                                           service which offers young people free,
        The Young Minds website is here:                  safe and anonymous online chat 24 hours
    YoungMinds | Mental Health Charity For                                  a day.
    Children And Young People | YoungMinds                              Home - Kooth
 Brainwaves

                                      We are pleased to announce that our school has been selected to take part
                                     in Brainwaves, an exciting new mental health and wellbeing research study
                                     runby the University of Oxford’s Department of Psychiatry, in partnership
                                     with the University of Swansea and The Day, the online student newspaper
                                       that turns news into lessons. Today’s young people face challenges in a
                                           world full of conflicting, confusing, and often incorrect information.
                                       BrainWaves is a direct response to this. It aims to improve the quality of
   scientific knowledge about adolescent mental health and provide evidence-based, practical strategies and
  educational materials to schools. BrainWaves is creating a large-scale national student group to participate
   in research and help develop the project. Our Sixth Form students will be invited to be in the first wave of
      schools taking part and will beworking closely to support the University of Oxford in their research.

    We are excited that our students will have the unique opportunity to shape the landscape of adolescent
                         mental health. If you would like to know more about the project.
                                                      Please visit:
 Home - Brainwaves Free mental health resources for secondary schools (brainwaveshub.org)




  Resources ~ Wellbeing Directory




         A Guide for Parents to Black Lives Matter
       published by the childcare platform, Yoopies.
        They state that “Racism and race is not a             Karma Nirvana is an award-winning National charity
  one-conversation topic, and our guide by no means              supporting victims of honour-based abuse and
           contains all the answers, we simply                forced marriage. Honour crimes are not determined
   hope to provide the foundations of good places to                         by age, faith, gender or
        start and help empower families to work                  sexuality, we support and work with all victims
      towards racial equality”. It is written with a
   British perspective, with contributions from both                  UK Helpline: 0800 5999 247
                 white and BAME writers.
                                                                          Monday - Friday: 9am - 5pm

A Parent's Guide to Black Lives Matter (yoopies.co.uk)                          Karma Nirvana
 Resources ~ Wellbeing Directory




    We provide advice and support to empower            You can access confidential emotional support at
   anyone experiencing a mental health problem.         any time from Samaritans. Whatever you’re going
           Infoline: 0300 123 3393                          through, a Samaritan will face it with you.

            Email: info@mind.org.uk                                     Call: 116 123
                   Text: 86463                                     or email: jo@samaritans.org
            We’re open 9am to 6pm,                          Calls are free We’re here 24 hours a day,
    Monday to Friday (except for bank holidays).                          365 days a year.


 Information for young people on mental health and                  Contact Us | Samaritans
                  wellbeing - Mind




                                                          The Muslim Youth Helpline (MYH) is an award
                                                            winning registered charity which provides
                                                        pioneering faith and culturally sensitive services to
                                                                     Muslim youth in the UK.

                                                          Free & confidential support to young people in
      Supporting those who have experienced
                                                                 need. Call: 0808 808 2008
  violence and abuse – domestic violence, sexual
  violence, ‘honour’ based violence, forced marriage,
FGM, human trafficking or modern slavery – we are         Email & Live Chat: Chat with us - Muslim Youth
                here to support you.                                   Helpline (myh.org.uk)


   Freephone 24-Hour National Domestic Abuse               Home - Muslim Youth Helpline (myh.org.uk)

         Helpline: 0808 2000 247

       visit www.nationaldahelpline.org.uk
        (access live chat Mon-Fri 3-10pm)
                       or visit:

                 Home - Refuge                                       Childline | Childline
Resources ~ Wellbeing Directory



        Mental Health & Wellbeing at SHSG

In SHSG, we often talk about how to look after our health in lessons and
      in tutor time. We have recently explored the field of Positive
 Psychology and we found out that research has shown that being kind,
generous with our time, spending time and money on experiences rather
   than material things are strong predictors of our future wellbeing.
However, we also acknowledge that life can get pretty tough sometimes.
    If you need support or information about how to cope with your
         emotions, you can visit the school website and look at


 Mental Health & Wellbeing - Southend High School for Girls (shsg.org).

       There, you will find some articles, videos and useful links.
       The school has also put together a Padlet for Lower and
       Middle school and one for Sixth Form for you to browse.

                      Please find the links below:


  Lower and Middle school SHSG Mental Health Board (padlet.com)


               SHSG Mental Health Board (padlet.com)
   School Nurse Information




            SCHOOL NURSE
Just a reminder that the School Nursing Team are still supporting children and families during this time.
The School Nursing team can be contacted on 01702 534843 by parents, young people and schools.

Schools can also continue to contact the team via the generic School Nursing email:
Sccg.southendpublichealthnurses@nhs.net

Young people living in Southend can also access ChatHealth, which is a secure and confidential text
messaging service for young people aged between 11 – 19 years.
It allows young people living in Southend to easily and anonymously get in touch with a School Nurse for
advice and support regarding mental health, sexual health, bullying, drugs, alcohol,
self-harm, relationships and smoking as well as any other health issue. TEXT: 07520 649895.

Please continue to follow and share our twitter page with parents Southend School Nurses (@SouthendSN)
/ X (twitter.com) for updates on useful health resources, sharing of health information and hints and tips to
support children and young people’s mental health.

We also work closely with our health visiting colleagues and are aware that lots of the children and young
people we support also have an under 5 in the family.
Information on health visiting support for families can be found below:

Health visitors and school nurses – Southend-on-Sea City Council

Health visiting 0-5 – Livewell Southend

Please continue to share these links and contact details with the families and young people at your schools.

Many Thanks

Hannah Hayes –Senior School Nurse – Southend-on-Sea Borough Council
