       Advance HE EDI Conference 2025
The sum of many parts: Embedding intersectionality
                 in HE practice
Session abstracts
Day 1 – 2 April 2025

Keynote, 10:10 - 10:50, Stephenson Suite
Unlocking the future of Intersectionality: Communities, Truth and Power
Dr Arun Verma, Head of Equality, Diversity and Inclusion, University of London
Intersectionality is an opportunity for us as a community to be courageous in our principles
and approach to equity, inclusion, anti-racism and social justice. It is a metaphor, lens and
truth that permits us to engage with those most impacted by and living in the margins where
oppressions overlap to make a truly joyful change to our cultures and systems. When we
embrace the power of intersectionality, we can then authentically address some of the most
pressing equalities challenges facing higher education and society on the horizon.


Parallel Session 1, 11:05 - 12:05
Session 1.1
Harnessing lived experiences: Creating neurodiverse learning environments
Davina Whitnall, The University of Salford
Interactive workshop session (60 minutes), Stephenson Suite
Join us for “Harnessing Lived Experiences: Creating neurodiverse learning environments,” a
dynamic session exploring how integrating lived experiences into educational practices can
revolutionize learning environments. Discover innovative methods like Phenomenon-Based
Learning, poetry, and script writing to support neurodiversity and elevate diverse voices.
Engage in meaningful discussions within safe and brave spaces, fostering a community of
shared learning and allyship. Participants benefit from gaining practical strategies to
enhance inclusivity and engagement and a supportive environment to bring this into their
own practice.

Session 1.2
Intersectional lifelines: A catalyst for leadership insight
Dr Sandie Dunne, University of Birmingham and Jackie Kilbane, University of Manchester
Interactive workshop session (60 minutes), Northumbrian Suite
The workshop will enable delegates to identify their own intersectional influences on identity
and work practices, including individual authority and use of power. Taking part in the
workshop creates valuable space for reflection as well as an opportunity to learn an inclusive
technique that has been successfully facilitated with adult learners across multiple sectors.

Session 1.3
Decolonial pedagogies in clinical education
Dr Ban Haider, City St George's, University of London
Interactive workshop session (60 minutes), Rocket Suite
This interactive workshop explores some of the pedagogical approaches that can challenge
inherent power imbalances in undergraduate clinical education. Participants will discuss
application of these learning theories as an approach to dismantle intersectional barriers and
promote equity and social justice in healthcare teaching and practice. Through critical
reflection and group work, attendees can discuss methods that contribute to the creation of
inclusive learning environments and consider the implementation of strategies within their
own educational settings. This session is suitable for staff and students involved in medical
or clinical education.
Session 1.4a
Amplifying diverse voices: An intersectional approach to curriculum inclusivity in
higher education
Dr Raheela Awais, Professor Gita Sedghi and Dr Maria Limniou, University of Liverpool
Oral presentation (30 minutes), Planet Suite
Higher Education institutions are increasingly committed to creating inclusive environments
that reflect their diverse student populations. This study emphasizes an intersectional
approach to curriculum development, engaging students with multiple, overlapping identities
as active partners. Using the Inclusive Curriculum Tool (ICT), student interns assessed
inclusivity across 45 STEM modules, collaborating on improvements in content and delivery.
Feedback from surveys and focus groups highlighted key areas, including belonging and
inclusive teaching. This study advocates for a pluralistic intersectional framework within HE
that regularly integrates diverse student voices, fostering an inclusive experience that
enhances students' sense of belonging, academic success, and engagement.

Session 1.4b
Embedding EDI into BSc economics curriculum – an experimental approach
Dr Yao Yao, University of Birmingham
Oral presentation (30 minutes), Planet Suite
We employ a pedagogical experiment to evaluate the impacts of introducing EDI teaching
sessions in BSc Economics curriculum on students’ knowledge and understanding on EDI,
teamworking skills and employability. This experiment contributes to developing a diverse
and inclusive environment in the classroom setting). The findings shed light on how to
develop such environment effectively by actively involving and working with students. It also
provides evidence on what works in terms of enhancing students experience as well as
narrowing the awarding gaps. Lastly, it contributes to institutional cultural change and
innovative teaching practices on inclusion by encouraging an open conversation.

Session 1.5a
Aligning your chartermarks
Emily Segaran and Rakhee Patel, Loughborough University
Oral presentation (30 minutes), Planet Suite
At Loughborough University, the gender equity officer and race equity officer have been
working together to align our Athena Swan and REC priorities and deliver charter mark
action plans in a joined-up way across the institution. In this session we provide insight into
our approach, outlining how we work together, with our respective SATs and with action
holders, to facilitate the delivery of our charter mark work in a more holistic and coordinated
way. We will share our learnings, the barriers we encountered and how we are addressing
barriers to further embed intersectionality across the institution.

Session 1.5b
The inclusive Durham framework: A roadmap to community action and a sense of
belonging
Louise Wright and Dr David Lowther, Durham University
Oral presentation (30 minutes), Planet Suite
The Inclusive Durham Framework is a community-led imperative that guides our purpose
and our actions. We will outline the basis of our ground-breaking intersectional, holistic
approach to institutional EDI, the practical context to how we are implementing this through
our framework model (5 pillars of focus, 4 strategic aims, 8 key themes). We will explain the
inception of the framework, and how we developed the underpinning themes using data,
consultation and lived experience. We will explain our vision of a university where everyone
feels they belong, and our journey to creating an intersectional action plan that spans the
whole community.

Session 1.6a
A fair chance to succeed? A wealth justice approach to student support
Brigit McWade, Lancaster Medical School, Lancaster University
Oral presentation (30 minutes), Locomotion 2
Money makes the world go round! And yet it is an under-explored feature of learning,
belonging, and succeeding in higher education. The material results of impoverishment are
well-established, yet less is known about the way it transforms our experiences of the world,
influencing our thoughts and feelings in ways that last long after money might become more
plentiful. Join me to learn more about how I use concepts of economic violence, financial
trauma, and a wealth justice approach to remove barriers to success for disadvantaged
students. Discuss how these might work for you, and structural change across the sector.


Session 1.6b
Working in partnership with diverse students: embedding EDI in approaches to student
voice and representation
Megan Brown, Student Partnerships in Quality Scotland
Oral presentation (30 minutes), Locomotion 2
This session will explore student engagement and partnership through the lens of equality,
diversity and inclusion. We’ll consider how approaches to student partnership can involve
diverse student groups at all levels of the institution, from classroom to strategic level
decision making. The session will also use sparqs’ Student Learning Experience model to
consider how EDI can be embedded across conversations with students about their
experiences of learning and teaching. The session will highlight practical ways to monitor
your student rep diversity and to take steps to ensure that institutions and students’
associations are capturing the voices of all students, however and wherever they learn.


Session 1.7
The assessment extensions data dilemma and equity in university education:
Navigating the paradoxes of policy and inclusivity
Dr Jackie Cameron, Dr Mavis Gutu and Simone Kurtzke, Edinburgh Napier University
Walkshop session (60 minutes), Planet Suite
This digitally supported walking workshop addresses the equity implications of assessment
deadline extensions, questioning whether they benefit all students equally. Drawing on data
from a UK university business school, participants will evaluate preliminary findings and
explore how they impact various student demographics, including traditionally marginalised
groups. Through guided discussions, attendees will collaboratively outline key elements for a
framework that could better promote inclusivity in assessment practices. This session
provides an interactive space for rethinking an important aspect of HE policy and offers an
evaluative approach to refining assessment frameworks that reflect diverse student
experiences.

Parallel Session 2, 12:15 - 13:15
Session 2.1
Co-production of a student-delivered workshop to deliver inclusive experiences for
intersectional students in higher education
Dr Neha Chandarana, Dr Susanne Quadflieg, Dr Maria Tsapali, Dr Nicola Warren-Lee and
Dr Anna Baker, University of Bristol and Dr Matt Jacobs, Wide Open Voice
Interactive workshop session (60 minutes), Stephenson Suite
This session will introduce the co-produced intervention implemented as part of an RAE-
funded EDI initiative involving a diverse cohort of 12 intersectional undergraduate
engineering/computer science student co-producers (SCPs). Attendees will learn about co-
production as a methodology for incorporating student perspectives into workshops and
training for staff members and have the opportunity to experience the activities developed by
our SCPs. Workshop delegates will leave with a refreshed and deepened understanding of
the challenges of intersectionality within students’ experiences as well as a set of tools to
enable them to use their position to improve the inclusive support offered to students.

Session 2.2
Wellbeing inclusion and culture committee, a model of Intersectionality applied in
STEM
Dr Federico Palmisani, Dr Eleanor Townsend, Dr Shalinee Dhayal, Dr Andrew Davenpoty
Jenny Harris and Dr Bex Smith, University of Exeter
Interactive workshop session (60 minutes), Northumbrian Suite
Join us for an engaging workshop that showcases our Wellbeing, Inclusion, and Culture
Committee as a model of intersectionality in STEM. Participants will choose from five
identity-based streams—LGBTQ+, Mental Health, Awarding Gaps, Ethnic Minorities, and
Neurodiversity—to collaboratively address a common issue from diverse perspectives.
Experience firsthand the complexities of intersectionality and gain practical strategies for
promoting equality and inclusion in higher education. This dynamic session invites you to
explore how interconnected identities shape our experiences and informs effective practices
within your institution. Don’t miss this opportunity to contribute to a richer understanding of
diversity in academia!

Session 2.3
Beyond Labels: Neurodivergence and Intersectionality in higher ed
Bjorn Spain, Edinburgh University Students' Association
Interactive workshop session (60 minutes), Rocket Suite
Join us to explore neurodivergence as a key intersectional identity in higher education. This
interactive workshop provides practical skills, including empathy mapping and strategy-
building, to better support neurodivergent students with intersecting identities, such as race,
gender, and sexuality. Using insights from Student Unions, attendees will collaborate to
develop adaptable strategies that foster inclusivity and empathy within their institutions. This
session encourages cross-pollination of ideas, equipping participants with achievable,
impactful methods to make their own spaces more inclusive. Perfect for university staff
aiming to enhance their understanding and approach to neurodivergent and intersectional
identities in EDI practices.

Session 2.4a
TBC
TBC
Oral presentation (30 minutes), Invicta
TBC

Session 2.4b
Responsible use of intersectional data in higher education
Dr Vanessa Ho, City St George's, University of London
Oral presentation (30 minutes), Invicta
This session aims to provide an overview of the conceptual and practical approaches to
intersectional equality data. It focuses on the use of data in context and some of the
challenges and potentials when we draw on the intersectional framework to understand
experiences of inequality. For instance, what do we mean by intersectional data? How might
we embed intersectional analysis to help identify biases and improve equality outcomes?

Session 2.5a
Exploring systemic challenges and fostering an inclusive environment in higher
education
Dr Gloria Botchway, Dr Lucy Currie and Princess Bwanya, Northumbria University
Oral presentation (30 minutes), Locomotion 1
We discuss how S.HI.NE is examining and providing solutions to the continuous systemic
challenges faced by Black females working and studying in HE. The importance of social
activism and collective action and how these are driving change towards a more equitable
environment, will be explored. Through our underpinning philosophy of ‘It takes a Village’,
participants will learn how an intersectional approach is helping us to deal with differences
and create community. Key takeaways include the provision of strategies to implement self-
care, minimising the impact of challenges encountered, thereby paving the way for self-
growth and development.

Session 2.5b
‘The power of lived experience’: The development of an EDI steering group through
active engagement with experiences of women from racially marginalised groups
Seraphina Simmons-Bah, Iain Kitchener and Samina Qureshi, University of Greenwich
Oral presentation (30 minutes), Locomotion 1
This presentation will provide an insight into the ways in which active allyship enabled a
Head of School to engage the lived experiences of women of colour, with the women
involved drawing upon both vulnerability and tenacity to drive the development of a School
EDI Steering Group in a post-1992 institution. The process has given rise to necessary
tensions, which have been accommodated so that alliances can be nurtured and EDI work
advanced. The presentation will build upon the reflections of the presenters to highlight
principles for practice which can be applied in a range of contexts.

Session 2.6a
Intersectionality and innovation: PPI in conversation
Dr Sarah Crabtree, Dr Honor Morris and Leonie Lawson, King's College London
Oral presentation (30 minutes), Locomotion 2
This session is an insight into the experiences and views of those directly involved in
creating inclusive and collaborative academic research. Moderated by the project
coordinator, public member Leonie Lawson and faculty PPI coordinator Sarah Crabtree talk
about their experiences as co-leads on the Inclusive Research and Education Practices
Project in the faculty of Nursing Midwifery and Palliative Care at King's College London.

Session 2.6b
Creating a culture of inclusion: Increasing diversity and equity of access (IDEA)
Professor Joanna Semlyen, UEA
Oral presentation (30 minutes), Invicta
IDEA (Increasing Diversity and Equality of Access), a Wellcome Trust funded initiative,
addresses lack of diversity and inequality of access head on; creating a revolution where
equality, diversity and inclusion (EDI) are at the foundation of research culture, not an after-
thought. Based in the Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences (FMH) at the University of
East Anglia (UEA), the IDEA projects will move beyond policy by proposing impactful and
practical approaches, bringing about meaningful change. Key benefits include fostering a
culture of inclusivity, upskilling research leaders to tackle inequalities, and increasing
diversity of staff to achieve a university-wide, enduring transformation.


Session 2.7a
The retirement experiences of senior women academics: Addressing identity and
inclusion
Dr Mairead Cahill, University of Limerick
Ten-minute thesis (10 minutes), Planet Suite
Transitioning to retirement is complex and increasingly relevant as the academic workforce
ages globally. Early and mid-career challenges for women's academics are well-
documented, yet their late-career experiences remain under-researched. Using qualitative
data from retirement interviews (N=50) with women academics in the Republic of Ireland,
this presentation examines the intersectionality of gender and age in academia, focusing on
challenges such as exclusion and lack of recognition of their continued contributions. The
session aims to promote awareness and discussion on more inclusive and equitable policies
in higher education, addressing the under-researched experiences of late-career transitions
of women in academia.

Session 2.7b
Empowering LGBTQIA+ international students of color
Feifan Ma, The Ohio State University
Ten-minute thesis (10 minutes), Planet Suite
Join us for an engaging session exploring how higher education institutions can better
support LGBTQIA+ international students of colour. This session will provide fresh
perspectives on using intersectionality to address educational inequities, foster safe spaces,
and build effective mentoring systems. Gain practical strategies to enhance your institution's
equity, diversity, and inclusion initiatives.

Session 2.7c
Barriers and bridges: Examining the intersecting determinants impacting the career
trajectories of black women teachers in the UK
Chiedza Ikpeh, University of Chester
Ten-minute thesis (10 minutes), Planet Suite
Explore the intersecting challenges and opportunities shaping the career trajectories of Black
women teachers in UK secondary education. This session unveils key findings on barriers
such as recruitment biases and limited advancement, as well as strategies for fostering
inclusion. Drawing on Critical Race Theory, Intersectionality, and Black Feminist Thought,
this research highlights actionable insights for educational leaders and EDI practitioners
aiming to create inclusive, equitable environments. Join us to gain innovative tools and
frameworks to support Black educators and enhance representation in leadership,
contributing to a more inclusive educational landscape.

Session 2.7d
Understanding the awarding gap through the lived experiences of minority ethnic
students: An intersectional approach
Professor Leslie Gutman, University College London
Ten-minute thesis (10 minutes), Planet Suite
There is a long-standing gap in degree award outcomes for undergraduate students with
white students more likely to graduate with a ‘good degree’ than students from minority
ethnic backgrounds. Using an intersectionality lens, this qualitative study explores the lived
experiences of minority ethnic undergraduate female students. Themes with intersectional
dimensions including gender, nationality, immigrant status, socioeconomic status and
educational background included biased attitudes and stereotypes, being underestimated
and needing to work harder, the need for more diversity, feelings of disconnection and lack
of integration with other minority ethnic students. In a co-design workshop, participants
shared their proposed strategies for change.

Parallel Session 3, 14:00- 15:00
Session 3.1
The intersectional practitioner: LFPS a tool to reduce harm
Robina Begum, University of Nottingham / The Reverse Mentoring Practice LTD
Interactive workshop session (60 minutes), Stephenson Suite
The Intersectional Practitioner's session will explore the Reverse Mentoring Practice LTD-
Liberation Focused Practice Supervision (LFPS) framework and model through an
intersectional lens and examine its potential as a transformative practice for EDI in
educational settings. By focusing on how the framework and model can be used in practice
to challenge us, developing critical thinking as individuals, in turn reducing harm and
developing ongoing reflection, whilst aligning ourselves as practitioners and gaining support
through inclusive and partnership work and leadership. The session will provide practical
strategies for fostering the LFPS model within EDI practice.

Session 3.2
Clashing cultures: From content warnings to beyond
Dr Sheena Kalayil and Catherine Franc, University of Manchester
Interactive workshop session (60 minutes), Northumbrian Suite
Student activism around how we teach content revealed that we were using content
warnings inconsistently. Embarking on a School-wide project to address these issues has
encouraged us as practitioners to be less ‘secretive’ about our approaches and share
practice. We will share our toolkits in our workshop. But what we also want to share is how
our initial discussions on racist and legacy language additionally uncovered different
experiences of colleagues, some from minoritized groups in the Academy. Our workshop will
be interactive, encouraging participation in citizens’ assembly-type role plays and discussion
of real-life scenarios with which we can all relate.


Session 3.3
Supporting a holistic approach to EDI: Advance HE’s Inclusive Institutions Framework
Dr Ruth Gilligan, Advance HE, Advance HE
Interactive workshop session (60 minutes), Rocket Suite
This session will introduce the Inclusive Institutions Framework (IIF), Advance HE’s new
strategic tool to help institutions align and embed EDI, widening participation, and local
priorities. Designed to maximise impact, efficiency and sustainability, the IIF will support
institutions through four interconnected modules, a practical departmental toolkit, and a new
Impact Award Scheme. Join us to learn more about how this framework can help your
institution take a joined-up, evidence-led and sustainable approach to driving equality,
diversity and inclusion.


Session 3.4a
Fieldtrips for all; identifying and mitigating intersectional barriers to outdoor
education
Dr Adrian Gonzalez and Dr Karen Parkhill, University of York
Oral presentation (30 minutes), Invicta
Residential fieldtrips are an integral part of environmental studies. However, whilst these
trips present significant learning opportunities, intersectional barriers are evident. Using the
Department of Environment and Geography, UoY as a case study, this presentation will
outline efforts to redevelop residential fieldtrips into more accessible and inclusive
experiences and practice through two projects co-designed with student partners. Together,
these highlight the importance of preparation, transparency and student empowerment
around fieldtrip educational activities. We will provide an honest reflection on the successes
and challenges of co-creating EDI field trips that take account of the intersectionality using
these methods.

Session 3.4b
The scientist builder model
Dr Mouna Chetehouna and Dr Eldad Avital, Queen Mary University of London
Oral presentation (30 minutes), Invicta
Experience The Scientist Builder Model, an innovative framework transforming STEM
education through rigorous intersectional inclusivity and ground-breaking methodologies. By
merging academic rigour with applied problem-solving, this model propels underrepresented
students to excel as visionary leaders, delivering measurable impact in sustainable scientific
and engineering advancements. Educators will be equipped with robust, adaptable
strategies to elevate equity, reimagine pedagogy, and drive profound, cross-disciplinary
innovation. Discover the demonstrable success of The Scientist Builder Model, a creative
approach setting new standards for inclusive, high-impact education, empowering
marginalised and diverse talents to tackle complex global challenges with exceptional
competence and insight.

Session 3.5a
Balancing free speech and equity, diversity and inclusion
Denise Miller, Agnes Kosek and Robert Morgan, University of Greenwich
Oral presentation (30 minutes), Locomotion 1
This session explores the intersection of Equity, Diversity, and Inclusion (EDI) and free
speech in UK universities, and highlights how political ideologies influence students’
perceptions of EDI initiatives. Drawing from qualitative student survey responses, this
presentation reveals how political diversity can influence feelings of exclusion, particularly
among students with non-left-leaning beliefs. The session aligns with Sustainable
Development Goals 4, 10, and 16, and promotes academia’s role in developing spaces that
promote open dialogue, mutual respect, and a sense of belonging for all students.

Session 3.5b
"As an Ethiopian, my heart goes out to the Arab students": Intersectional solidarity in
Israeli higher education
Dr Shula Mola, Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Oral presentation (30 minutes), Locomotion 1
This ethnographic study examines how Ethiopian-Jewish students at the Hebrew University
of Jerusalem navigate experiences of marginalization alongside their Arab peers during the
Israel-Hamas conflict. Through in-depth interviews and participant observation, the research
reveals how shared experiences of exclusion create unexpected bridges between these
minority groups, challenging conventional narratives about inter-community relations in
Israeli academia. The findings demonstrate how DEI initiatives, despite political tensions,
serve as platforms for cross-cultural dialogue. The study offers insights into how
intersectional approaches can transform campus dynamics and foster meaningful inter-
group connections amid societal polarization.

Session 3.6a
Intersectional and cross sector approaches to integrating EDI into higher education
curricula
Dr Michelle Welsh and Dr Ourania Varsou, University of Glasgow and Dr Taghried Abdel-
Magid, University of Bath
Oral presentation (30 minutes), Locomotion 2
Join this interactive workshop to learn how to integrate EDI into your own teaching practice
and transform curriculum design, adopting an intersectional wholistic framework informed on
presenters’ experience from undergraduate and postgraduate curricula, and grounded on
recent literature. Through hands-on activities, you will explore practical solutions for
addressing gaps in student representation, creating inclusive safe learning environments,
and empowering socially and ethically aware graduates. This session is designed to equip
educators and policy leaders with real-world actionable strategies to promote EDI and
empower students to challenge discrimination in their future careers. Don’t miss this
opportunity to enhance your EDI impact!

Session 3.6b
Demystifying the hidden curriculum through mentoring: An intersectional approach to
supporting chemistry undergraduates at key transition stages
Dr Derek Wann and Leonie Jones, University of York
Oral presentation (30 minutes), Locomotion 2
Chemistry@York has taken a mentoring approach to tackling inequity at the intersection of
socio-economic background/gender to improve induction, retention and progression of
undergraduates through co-created schemes. Firstly, at the very start of their undergraduate
journey, and at the end, when considering progression to postgraduate study. Both schemes
focus on helping students to develop science capital, access advice, navigate academic
systems, develop their networks, and improve their sense of belonging. The benefits of
mentoring in providing effective support at key transition stages, demystifying academia and
actively addressing structural barriers will be highlighted.

Session 3.7
Voices of diversity: Exploring mental health through an intersectional lens
Denise Coles, Lewis Jenkins and Tandrima Bhattacharjee, Loughborough University
Walkshop session (60 minutes), Planet Suite
Loughborough University’s EDI Service has successfully run a Voices of Diversity allyship
series: panel conversations on ways to support people from a marginalised group. An
extension of this series designed to create further organisational change has been designed.
This unique series places an intersectional lens on mental health focusing on cultural groups
who commonly experience mental health issues, yet their lived experiences are seldom
discussed e.g., people from racialised minorities or LGBTQ+ groups. This session will
highlight the importance of discussing mental health from a cultural lens and provide
concrete ways this approach can be embedded into participants' workspaces.

Parallel Session 4, 15:15 - 16:15
Session 4.1
Not waving but drowning? Using extensions requests as the opportunity to uncover
intersectional needs and support progression
Dr Wannette Van Eg Dom -Tuinstra and Bryony Gilbert, Open University
Interactive workshop session (60 minutes), Stephenson Suite
Based on our analysis of extension requests on a large Level 1 Law module at the OU, it is
evident that underneath an extension request are complex, intersectional circumstances.
Simply granting an extension without further investigation may be missing the fact that the
student is ‘not waving but drowning’, as well as an opportunity to provide more targeted,
effective and equitable intervention. This workshop explores the way in which the data on
extensions can be used meaningfully to support our students, and how extensions can be a
focal point for more effective support that reflects our students’ individual intersectionality.

Session 4.2
No single-issue lives
Dr Amosm, Dr Suryia Nayak, Patience Udonsi, Maxine Hamilton-Bell and Johana Hammad,
University of Salford
Interactive workshop session (60 minutes), Northumbrian Suite
This workshop is a call to action! It will invite you into personal enquiry, dialogue and practice
sharing to promote the activation of intersectionality in practice. Firstly, it will introduce a
successful model of collective action in Higher Education based on belonging, inclusivity,
and equitable partnership with minoritised ethnic students. Secondly, you will be invited to
personally reflect on the importance of context, location and situatedness via an experiential
activity. The workshop will conclude with reflections on ‘what keeps us going’ as Equity,
Diversity, Inclusion practitioners, developing a mantra/intention/affirmation that will support
you as your progress in this work.

Session 4.3
Understanding EDI prompts in course design
Dr Chris Knifton, De Montfort University
Interactive workshop session (60 minutes), Rocket Suite
Equality prompts, Equality Impact Assessments, Equality reviews, etc., are just a few names
given to the process of reviewing programmes, modules or courses for academic quality
through an EDI lens. Templates, processes, training and guidance however will vary across
HEIs. This workshop aims to capitalize on our collective intersectional experiences to
critically consider these processes and to generate new, innovative, working practices,
providing discussion space for trouble shooting and collective reflection.

Session 4.4a
Balancing time equity and academic integrity: The paradox of deadline extensions in
higher education
Dr Jackie Cameron, Dr Mavis Gutu and Simone Kurtzke, Edinburgh Napier University
Oral presentation (30 minutes), Invicta
Higher education policies around deadline extensions seek to promote inclusivity yet may
inadvertently create inequalities among student groups. This session examines this paradox
through case study data, revealing which groups may benefit most from extension policies
and where inequities may persist. Attendees will engage in the interactive Policy Design Lab,
collectively exploring ways to enhance inclusivity in deadline extension policies. The session
will also address data challenges, exploring whether more comprehensive demographic data
can support equitable assessment policies. Participants will gain insights they can apply in
their institutional settings.

Session 4.4b
Culturally affirming, validating and relatable mentoring for racially minoritised
students in higher education
Josephine Gabi, Dr Araida Hidalgo-Bastida, Josie Leydon and Grace Johnson, Manchester
Metropolitan University
Oral presentation (30 minutes), Invicta
Student participation in higher education continues to improve with institutions more
accountable for student outcomes (Quality Standards Condition B3). However, racially
minoritised students still face significant disparities in securing graduate-level jobs and often
leave university with lower class degrees compared to their white peers. Our work at
Manchester Metropolitan University’s found that culturally relevant mentoring improved
employability confidence and career prospects for racially minoritised students. The study
highlights the importance of tailored mentoring in overcoming barriers related to race,
gender, and class. Interactive tools (Padlet) will ensure a dynamic session where the
audience can co-create approaches to support these students.

Session 4.5a
Cultivating community and belonging through creative work-based learning for
students with multiple marginalised intersectional identities at Manchester
Metropolitan University
Gavin Douglas and Nathan Roberts, Manchester Metropolitan University
Oral presentation (30 minutes), Locomotion 1
Aligning with Edelman’s phrase, “you can’t be what you can’t see,” our work-based learning
projects aim to strengthen students’ confidence in their intersectional identities. By
connecting students with peers and industry professionals who share similar backgrounds or
protected characteristics, we create supportive initiatives that go beyond employability to
foster authentic belonging (Blake et al., 2022). This EDI-focused approach aims to address
the barriers marginalized students face, providing a vision for their careers and professional
networks. Ultimately, we seek to enhance retention and educational outcomes for students
with intersectional identities (Crenshaw, 1991), supporting both individual growth and
institutional EDI objectives.
Session 4.6a
Belonging: The paradox of intersectionality in EDI
Dr Wayne Mitchell, Imperial College London
Oral presentation (30 minutes), Locomotion 2
Institutional EDI strategies designed to implement practices that develop a sense of
belonging within their community can often experience a bottleneck due to a lack of
consideration of intersectionality. Paradoxically, the practices designed to reduce inequality
can result in individuals experiencing greater marginalization when their specific compound
needs go unrecognized. This session will reflect on the lessons learnt over the past 2
decades and share insights of the development of an innovative institutional strategy using
the concept of ‘targeted universalism’ focusing on changing structures and systems rather
than targeting specific groups.

Session 4.6b
Diversifying influence for more effective decisions: The use of shadow committees to
enhance inclusive participation in strategic decision-making
Sophie Daniels, Durham University and and Sapna Marwaha, Formation Consultancy
Oral presentation (30 minutes), Locomotion 2
Durham University’s Wellcome-funded Reimagining Governance for a Flourishing Research
Culture is trialling the use of shadow committees to diversify participation and perspectives
in governance settings. Whilst rarely used in higher education, shadow committees have
been shown to demonstrably improve inclusivity, engagement, and innovation in decision-
making, and, consequently, generate better decisions, an enhanced sense of agency, and
improved culture. The session will provide attendees with an overview of this innovative
intervention, how it has been used, the impact it has had thus far on enhancing inclusivity,
and the tools to trial this impactful intervention in their own higher education settings.

Session 4.7a
The guardians of meritocracy? Resistance to gender equality and diversity in
academia
Dr Meytal Jona, Weizmann Institute of Science
Ten-minute thesis (10 minutes), Planet Suite
This session explores the hidden resistance to gender equality and diversity within academic
institutions, focusing on how gatekeepers across all levels obstruct change. Drawing on case
studies from various academic settings, we analyse how gatekeepers at all levels—
management, scientific personnel, and administration—subtly obstruct or delay diversity and
gender equality efforts. We introduce the concept of "screening turbulence," revealing the
complexity of identifying and addressing these barriers. The session also critiques existing
diversity programs, showing how they often maintain, rather than dismantle, power
structures. Attendees will leave with actionable insights to foster genuine organizational
change and build more inclusive academic environments.

Session 4.7b
Disablers and enablers of black academic progression: An intersectional systemic
research study of UK and US business schools
Olajumoke Okoya, University of East London and Professor Jonathan Passmore, Henley
Business School
Ten-minute thesis (10 minutes), Planet Suite
Black academics remain significantly underrepresented at the professorial level in UK
university business schools due to systemic barriers like structural racism, gatekeeping, and
limited development opportunities. This 18-month study, informed by UK and US multi-
stakeholder interviews, explores challenges such as institutional biases, psychological
fatigue, and learned helplessness that hinder career progression. The study introduces the
BRIDGE model, focusing on recruitment, retention, and equitable career growth to foster
belonging and inclusivity. The research published by Henley Business School offers
actionable steps for universities and professional bodies to promote equity, inclusion, and
sense of belonging for Black academics in UK business schools.

Session 4.7c
Re-thinking prevent duty training in higher education: Addressing exclusionary
practices
Dr Ban Haider, City St George's, University of London
Ten-minute thesis (10 minutes), Planet Suite
In this 3-minute introductory presentation, participants will explore the challenges raised by
exclusionary training content and practices within the context of Prevent Duty training in
higher education. The focus of this will be to recognise where unconscious bias and
discriminatory stereotypes may inadvertently undermine effective safeguarding and
preventative measures. Participants will be encouraged to ask questions and share their
views on how to adopt a more inclusive intersectional approach to enhance the efficacy of
training principles and foster a safer educational environment for all.

Session 4.7d
Contested spaces: Embracing complexities
Dr Angela Donin, City St George's, University of London
Ten-minute thesis (10 minutes), Planet Suite
Beginning with an introduction to providing support in contested spaces and the challenges
we may face; this session aims to discuss the experiences faced by staff and students in
relation to the Israel Palestine Crisis as an example. We aim to highlight the need for
intersectional approaches and empathy to avoid creating false dichotomies, instead we can
embrace the complexities of the many different lived experiences and promote
conversations to address tensions.
Day 2 – 3 April 2025

Keynote, 09:40 - 10:20, Stephenson Suite
I am the King of Wishful Thinking: Re-imagining intersectionality
Jason Arday, Professor of Sociology of Education in the Faculty of Education, University of
Cambridge
In a time of societal and political turbulence, the importance of intersectionality is paramount
in maintaining equality, diversity and inclusion for all. This talk aims to reimagine
intersectionality in response to the turbulence we currently face by recognising love,
tolerance, understanding and empathy as key instruments in creating a more harmonious
society and higher education sector.

Parallel Session 5, 10:35 - 11:35
Session 5.1
Charting a path to success: Celebrating two decades of the Advance HE Equality
Charters
Dr Sarah Essilfie-Quaye, Imperial College London and Kae Ohene-Yeboah, University College
London and Dr Joe Butterfield, Queen's University Belfast, and Francesca Guratsky, The
University of Manchester and Annie Hughes and Baljit Thatti, Kingston University
Interactive workshop session (60 minutes), Stephenson Suite
In our first of two sessions to mark 20 years of Athena Swan and 10 years of the Race
Equality Charter in the UK, this participatory workshop delves into the impact of the Equality
Charters in advancing gender and race equality. Drawing on case studies from institutions
and departments, we will explore how the Equality Charters have helped shape policy and
practice, foster culture change and empower underrepresented groups. Building on insights
from practitioners across the Charter membership, this session will be the beginning of
reflecting on the impact of 20 years of charters work.


Session 5.2
The inclusive teacher: Teacher CPD to put EDI into practice
Rina de Vries and Dr Irene Poort, University of Groningen
Interactive workshop session (60 minutes), Northumbrian Suite
Inclusive teaching sees intersectional diversity as a positive resource. Creating a culture of
belonging and equity, where all students feel safe and respected, is a prerequisite for
gaining value from diversity. However, teachers may lack certain knowledge and skills, or
think inclusion is something ‘extra’ for specialists. This session introduces the University of
Groningen’s e-learning CPD The Inclusive Teacher. Developed with input from teachers,
students, and diversity & inclusion professionals, this course offers practical tools and
training. In an interactive world-café format, delegates can explore some of our course
materials for taking practical, attainable steps towards a more inclusive classroom.

Session 5.3
Developing a self-assessment tool to drive improvements at faculty/school level
Eleanor Broadbent and Abbi Mottram, Leeds Beckett University
Interactive workshop session (60 minutes), Rocket Suite
How can we use data to support each area of the University to deliver its own EDI objectives
for staff and students? This workshop will introduce the Inclusive Self-Assessment Tool
(ISAT) initiative as piloted by Leeds Beckett University’s EDI Team. This work has been
inspired by and adapted from the University of British Columbia's original project.

Session 5.4
Skills and Education in the Realm of Digital Health: Thinking Outside the Box on
Inclusive Innovation Training
Professor Márjory Da Costa-Abreu, Hannah Clemmens, Dr Chris Bull and Emma Letham
Sheffield Hallam University
Roundtable discussion (60 minutes), Planet Suite
The rapid expansion of Digital Health brings immense opportunities but also challenges in
ensuring equitable access to skills and education. The EPSRC-funded Digital Health Hubs
across the UK are pioneering innovative approaches to training and engagement, moving
beyond traditional higher education and CPD models. These hubs aim to make Digital
Health innovation more inclusive by embedding intersectionality, public engagement (PPIE),
and open-access learning at their core.

This roundtable discussion will explore how the hubs are redefining skills provision by
integrating community-led approaches, trusted free resources, and alternative education
pathways to engage a diverse audience. By critically examining intersectionality and Equity,
Diversity, and Inclusion in Digital Health, we will discuss how tailored training models can
better support underrepresented groups. We will also address the interplay between
intersectionality and innovation, investigating how inclusive perspectives enhance problem-
solving and technological advancement.

Additionally, the session will share our practical strategies for creating dialogue, community,
and allyship, ensuring that Digital Health education reflects lived experiences and meets
real-world needs. Balancing inclusivity with ethical data governance will also be explored,
questioning how (or even if) it is possible to use data responsibly while maintaining trust in
this scope. Finally, we will consider the future of intersectionality in Digital Health education,
identifying key priorities for policy, practice, and research.


Session 5.5a
Codesign, collaboration & compliance: Aligning community with consent education
Catharine Pruscino and Michael Gonzalez, University of Technology, Sydney
Oral presentation (30 minutes), Locomotion 1
Since 2016, the UTS Respect.Now.Always program has developed a whole of community
approach to eliminating sexual violence, distinctively led by the student voice. As part of this,
the program partnered with UTS Library to focus on creating a safe campus, library and
service environment through a series of codesigned initiatives designed and delivered to
challenge norms, promote respectful behaviour and create a welcoming entrance to the
library and its services.

Session 5.5b
It's not what but how: Using content warnings in higher education
Dr Jessica Roy, Bristol
Oral presentation (30 minutes), Locomotion 1
Content warnings are a mainstay in cultural, social and (higher) educational life. The use of
content warnings is not, however, straightforward with evidence suggesting that such
warnings may exacerbate, not prevent, distress (Bridgland et al. 2022). In higher education,
there is also concern they could censor staff and students. This session will present findings
from a research project conducted with students, staff and wellbeing professionals at the
University of Bristol about their perspectives on content warnings. The session will conclude
by exploring whether and how we should prepare students for content.
Session 5.6
Bridging intersections: Embracing diversity
Zuzana Tesárová and Melody Chinenyanga, Technological University Dublin
Interactive workshop session (60 minutes), Locomotion 2
Education is essential in combating discrimination and racism, but true progress requires
embodied experiences. Our interactive workshop, inspired by Dr. Ibram X. Kendi and Dr.
Resmaa Menakem, facilitates meaningful dialogue between individuals with lived
experiences and those without, fostering deeper connections and promoting understanding
to drive social justice. This workshop explores identity and intersectionality through
interactive exercises like "Identity Bingo," "Walk in My Shoes," and "Cultural Exchange."
Participants reflect on personal and societal views, experience others’ perspectives, and
discover shared experiences, fostering empathy, inclusivity, and collaboration for classroom
and team settings.

Session 5.7
Innovation through co-production: Disrupting the hierarchy and moving beyond
consensus
Dr Ria Poole, University of Exeter
Walkshop (60 minutes), Planet Suite
Co-production is a key component in innovation design and is known to provide insights and
evidence for implementation with the aim of bringing about improvement. Taking an
inclusive intersectional approach throughout the co-production process means actively
engaging and representing those who are marginalised, centring their voices and ensuring
everyone is listened to. This involvement of stakeholders brings important perspectives and
challenges into account that can creatively improve innovations and increase the likelihood
of inclusive sustainable outputs. By taking an intersectional approach to co-production we
are called to disrupt the hierarchy and move beyond consensus to achieve meaningful
community-led action.

Parallel Session 6, 11:45 - 12:45
Session 6.1
Navigating Tomorrow: Equality Charters in the changing HE landscape
Chair: Tara Leach, Advance HE
Panellist: Ruth Gilligan, Advance HE and Professor Parveen Yaqoob, University of Reading
and Karishma Asher, University of Liverpool and Oyebanji Adewumi, University of Greenwich
Pannel (60 minutes), Stephenson Suite
In our second session, we look forward to explore how Equality Charters work can support
the higher education sector to address emerging issues and challenges for gender, and race
and intersectional equity in higher education and research. Featuring an interactive panel
discussion with EDI leaders and practitioners, we’ll consider the ongoing role of the Charters
in the context of the political, social and financial challenges that the sector is facing. Join us
as we envision the future of equality charters work and consider its relevance for staff and
students in an ever-changing academic and social landscape.

Session 6.2
EDI in programmes
Manaz Javaid and Dr Jennifer Martin, Cambridge Judge Business School
Interactive workshop session (60 minutes), Northumbrian Suite
Cambridge Judge Business School will provide an in-depth exploration of implementing EDI
to impact intersecting and multiple dimensions to create long-term change. The session will
provide real-life innovative examples from our Executive EMBA of initiatives that have
changed the interface of the Executive MBA programme leading to increased diversity
across identities and dimensions. You will leave this session with practical tips for identifying
the aspects that require change in your context and best practice tips to implement for
tangible results right throughout the student life journey and beyond.

Session 6.3
Exploring the role of arts and crafts in fostering intersectional exchange and
solidarity: Learning from traditional Romany paper flower making workshops
Roseann Black and Dr Natalie Forster, Northumbria University
Interactive workshop session (60 minutes), Rocket Suite
Join us for an interactive workshop to celebrate and try your hand at the traditional craft of
Romany paper flower making. Learn about how and why we’re working to increase the
visibility of Gypsy and Traveller culture, heritage and contributions in university environments
and discuss the potential role of arts and crafts activities in facilitating connection, dialogue
and allyship between staff and students with diverse heritage and identities.

Session 6.4a
Manchester is the place where we get on and do it
Professor Jackie Carter and Kathy Bradley, The University of Manchester
Oral presentation (30 minutes), Invicta
The University of Manchester’s EDI Directorate and three academic leads are dedicated to
an intersectional approach, as detailed in the Times Higher Education article “Weaving gold
from intersectional EDI straw.” This presentation will highlight Disability inclusion, building on
initiatives like Athena Swan, the Race Equality Charter, Stonewall, and Disability Confident.
Two Disabled presenters will share their collaborative efforts with staff and students to
create an inclusive community. They acknowledge the challenges but stress the necessity of
this work for a truly inclusive academy. Awards and accolades in EDI reflect progress, but
cultural change remains essential.

Session 6.4b
Our approach to equality impact assessments: Creating an intersectional community
of practice
Jon Opaye-Tetteh, Dr Chiara Pellegrini, Mark Hall and Cathy Blackford, Canterbury Christ
Church University
Oral presentation (30 minutes), Invicta
This year, Canterbury Christ Church University implemented a new Equality Impact
Assessment (EIA) process to transform the way in which equity and inclusion are embedded
in our decision-making. Key for this process is the EIA Review and Consultation Group,
gathering individuals with diverse lived experiences and areas of expertise to review
submitted EIAs. Creating an intersectional community of practice trained to evaluate EIAs
brings with it invaluable opportunities for ensuring that these assessments are meaningful,
rigorous, and bring real change. But how does this group function in practice, and what are
the challenges that one should prepare for?

Session 6.5a
Agency at the intersections: The power of black student support networks
Dr William Ackah, Birkbeck University of London
Oral presentation (30 minutes), Locomotion 1
This session explores the role of support networks in the lives of Black PhD students. The
session will critically examine the role of networks in the lives of students and the gaps that
they fill in meeting their needs. We will explore issues of power, inclusion and exclusion as
pertains to the lived experiences of Black PhD students. Whilst we celebrate the agency,
tenacity and brilliance of Black students, the session will ask why are these spaces still
necessary? And what can participants do to enhance and empower Black students to not
just survive academia but thrive?

Session 6.5b
First generation in higher education: Bridging divides through intersectionality in
times of crisis
Dr Yael Bar-Tzedek and Professor Orna Sasson-Levy, Bar-Ilan University
Oral presentation (30 minutes), Locomotion 1
Dr. Yael Bar-Tzedek and Prof. Orna Sasson-Levy presents a case study from Bar-Ilan
University, illustrating how the “first generation to higher education” category fosters
empathy and solidarity among diverse student groups. Set against a backdrop of national
conflict, this presentation shows how Jewish and Arab students bridged identity divides,
fostering inclusivity, resilience, and a commitment to academic excellence. The session will
provide attendees with actionable insights on leveraging intersectional approaches to build
connection and understanding within academic communities.

Session 6.6a
Data, dialogue, delivery & Durham: How data and collaboration changed the way a
200-year-old university thinks and drives holistic EDI
Andrew Ingleby, Durham University
Oral presentation (30 minutes), Locomotion 2
Join Andrew Ingleby in exploring the way that data, insights and collaboration are being used
to change the way the 200-year-old Durham University thinks about, and delivers, holistic
EDI culture change to over twenty-six and a half thousand students and members of staff.
Starting with the scene setting work of the Inclusive Durham Project Team; Andrew will
demonstrate how the data, insights and staff and student communities at Durham have been
consulted throughout the journey to the new holistic Inclusive Durham Framework. Andrew
will outline the next steps for the Framework and how success will be measured over time.

Session 6.6b
Intentional disruption
Camilla Gibson, University of Southampton
Oral presentation (30 minutes), Locomotion 2
EDI work can often feel complex and overwhelming, with real change hard to identify. By
deliberately deconstructing and rethinking our approach, we have created a holistic method
that confidently embraces complexity, placing people impact at its core. Using data and
insights, we engage our wider community transparently, celebrating successes while
candidly addressing ongoing injustices. By aligning actions across six equality charters, we
create powerful synergies that drive intersectional impact and enhance everyday
experiences.

Session 6.7a
The incapacity of UK equality law to accommodate three or more multiple
intersectional discriminations. A way forward for HE practices to remedy this lacuna
Nikki Modie-Nwaefulu, BPP University
Ten-minute thesis (10 minutes), Planet Suite
This paper is not recommending yet another change in legislation but for a hands-on deck
take using a bottom top approach by the HE sectors as explained above, to deal with this
lacuna. The bottom top approach will involve a change of the concept on equality to a more
substantive approach in Higher Education, involving a global look at multiple intersectionality
where HE will change policies, internal rules and ethics on a platform of substantive equality,
and extend this to teaching and learning.

Session 6.7b
The truth about intersectionality: Double discrimination, over-simplification and
reclaiming the power of the ‘I’ word
Professor Fiona Shelton and Dr Sean Wakton, Leeds Trinity University
Ten-minute thesis (10 minutes), Planet Suite
This session will return to the original definition of the term ‘intersectionality’ and examine
how the concept has been designed and redesigned, resulting in a loss of its original
meaning. We will offer a space for critical reflection and discussion about the use of the
term, along with the conceptual and emancipatory implications of how we understand
‘intersectionality’ Crenshaw refer to the double discrimination of racism and sexism faced
by Black women, and highlighted cases where women were forced to choose between
bringing a claim of racism or sexism. We evaluate how this impacts power relationships and
anti-discriminatory practice.

Session 6.7c
Decolonisation and diversification of the curricula as a student-staff partnership
Dr Shaun Bremner-Hart, University of Glasgow
Ten-minute thesis (10 minutes), Planet Suite
There is a perception that the sciences are unbiased and deliver objective facts. However,
historical and Eurocentric biases in funding and research have created a ripple effect in
which inequities are translated into taught material influencing future generations. This
student-led partnership developed a framework to assess taught content for geographical,
historical, and colonial bias/perspective. This identified areas which required diversification
and/or redesign. Student partners developed and delivered a workshop for undergraduate
students to teach them about the colonial roots of many of the core concepts in the
biosciences. This was received positively by students who praised the interactive delivery
style.

Session 6.7d
Active bystander training: From secondary to higher education
Laura Curran, Liverpool John Moores University
Ten-minute thesis (10 minutes), Planet Suite
Universities and HE institutions continue to deliver Active Bystander courses to staff and
students across the country. In Secondary and FE Institutions, some relevant curricula are
considered statutory (e.g., Relationships and Sex Education) whilst others are not (e.g.,
PSHE). This session will begin to explore what Active Bystander education currently exists in
Secondary and FE Institutions and propose initial ideas to bridge the two together to aid
transition and induction into life post-Secondary Education.


Panel Session, 13:30 - 14:15, Stephenson Suite
Intersectionality IRL
Chair: Professor Doyin Atewologun, Founder and CEO, Delta
Panellist: Professor Anuj Kapilashrami, Professor - School of Health and Social Care,
University of Essex, Tumi Sotire, Dyspraxia Advocate, Founder of The Black Dyspraxic and
Owen Ward, EDI Programme Manager for Race Equality, University of Galway
The panel aims to explore practical strategies for integrating intersectionality into Equity,
Diversity, and Inclusion (EDI) initiatives, offering actionable insights to inspire organizations to
operationalise intersectionality in their EDI initiatives. Using practical examples, panellists will
address the challenges and successes of operationalising intersectionality, ultimately leading
to more equitable and inclusive workplaces.


Parallel Session 7, 14:25- 15:25
Session 7.1
From theory to practice: Implementing intersectionality in higher education
Dr Panagiota (Peny) Sotiropoulou, Advance HE
Interactive workshop session (60 minutes), Stephenson Suite
Do you hear the word ‘intersectionality’ a lot, but still feel like you do not quite get it? Do you
want to learn more about intersectionality and how to implement it in practice in higher
education (HE)? Then this session is designed for you. This interactive workshop will take
you through:
• What intersectionality is and what it is not;
• Things we need to take into consideration when implementing intersectional approaches in
practice, including existing guidelines and resources;
• Some practical examples of how we can use intersectional approaches to better
understand and plan for staff and students within HE.

Session 7.2
Deploying language, culture and heritage as a tool for self-identity and self-care in
cross-cultural work environments
Dr Lucy Currie, Dr Gloria Botchway and Dr Princess Bwanya, Northumbria University
Interactive workshop session (60 minutes), Northumbrian Suite
Workshop activities will initiate open discussions on racial diversity, using language, culture
and heritage as a model for self-identity, affirmation and self-care. Academics and students
from outside the UK often suffer feelings of imposter syndrome, isolation, loneliness and
depression. Interactions between racial groups are hampered by the fear of ‘saying the
wrong thing’. This workshop will use fun language and culture activities to bring down
barriers and initiate safe and mutually respectful discussions across cultures. Examples of
strategies will be shared and more developed, to foster inter-cultural understanding and
respect, paving the way for allyship and community in the workplace

Session 7.3
The invisible disability: How culture and background affect specific learning
differences
Dr Dylan Griffiths, Professional Association of SpLD Specialists in Higher Education
(PASSHE)
Interactive workshop session (60 minutes), Rocket Suite
Dyslexia affects around 10% of people worldwide, with dyspraxia and dyscalculia each
impacting approximately 6%, often with overlap. Research shows that individuals from
middle-class, majority ethnic backgrounds are more likely to seek a diagnosis, while in some
cultures, specific learning differences are unrecognised or mistaken for cognitive
impairments, leaving many without needed support. Led by the Co-Chair of the Professional
Association of SpLD Specialists in Higher Education (PASSHE), this workshop explores the
financial and cultural barriers to SpLD recognition. Participants will discuss strategies to
improve institutional awareness and support for under-represented groups, creating a more
inclusive academic environment.

Session 7.4a
Intersectionality and its application in understanding barriers to women’s
advancement into HE
Rachitra Gunatilake, Global Banking School
Oral presentation (30 minutes), Invicta
Will look at intersectionality in entering higher education in built environment sectors with
particular reference to barriers which prevent encouraging young women adults to take on
STEM (science, technology, engineering and maths) subjects; foundation to smoothly transit
to HE education to gain skills required to pursue a variety of careers in construction. The
proposal will give evidence through a review of the literature on intersectionality of real-life
situations of young women and education advancement. Findings will highlight that perhaps
we as a society aren’t doing enough to address the multiple and intersecting dimensions
encourage girls to take up STEM subjects.

Session 7.4b
Transforming equality impact assessments: Embedding intersectionality to improve
outcomes
Kiren Chima, City St George's, University of London, and Michelle-Louise Yembra, City
University of London
Oral presentation (30 minutes), Invicta
Equality impact assessments are an evidence-based approach helping organisations ensure
their practices, policies and decision-making processes are fair and do not present barriers
or disadvantage any protected groups. Join our session Transforming Equality Impact
Assessments: Embedding Intersectionality to Improve Outcomes to learn how we revised
this process to ensure protected characteristics are not considered only in isolation and the
interplay of different characteristics are fully considered. Results include identifying
challenges and barriers that may not have otherwise been considered, resulting in more
effective changes and outcomes that are equitable, particularly for those at the intersections
of multiple forms of discrimination.

Session 7.5a
Capturing diverse student experiences authentically: Practical strategies for inclusive
survey design
Dr Hannah Slack, King's College London
Oral Presentation (30 minutes), Locomotion 1
In this presentation, I’ll emphasize the critical need for an inclusive approach to survey
design that authentically represents the diverse student population. Drawing from the
success of the U-Belong project at King’s College London, attendees will explore effective
strategies to creating surveys that are accessible, culturally sensitive, and use identity-
affirming, respectful language. Inclusive survey design isn’t just a best practice—it’s a
necessary step to ensure all participants feel seen, valued, and authentically represented. I
invite attendees to embrace a new standard for data collection, where mindful design fosters
true authenticity and transforms how we capture diverse student experiences.

Session 7.5b
Preventing talent loss: Addressing bullying and harassment in universities
Dr Leda Blackwood, University of Bath
Oral presentation (30 minutes), Locomotion 1
We report findings and policy development from an EPSRC-funded research program with
40 UK universities on the under-representation of minority groups in STEM academia. This
research challenges deficit models of attrition, emphasizing the role of hostile workplace
cultures. We find bullying and harassment are not random but rooted in exclusionary
discourses and social practices, denying minority members a shared STEM identity and
leading to significant personal and professional costs. Intersectionality is crucial in
structuring these experiences. We describe how this research informs solutions at one
university to challenge narrow identity boundaries, align organizational values with actions,
and improve complaint processes.

Session 7.6a
Lessons learnt from ASPIRE: Embedding intersectionality in the delivery and
evaluation of an EDI programme
Dr Florence Reedy, Advance HE and Dr Francis Awolowo, Sheffield Hallam University
Oral presentation (30 minutes), Locomotion 2
This session details the evaluation of the Accomplished Study Programme in Research
Excellence (ASPIRE), addressing the black PhD leaky pipeline. As the programme
concludes its three-year funding period, we will share evaluation findings, emphasising how
intersectionality informed both the evaluation approach and programme design. We will
discuss the collection of quantitative demographic data and qualitative analysis and how
experiences varied across different groups. We will also outline the programme’s evolution,
including adjustments made to accommodate participants’ intersecting identities and how
these shaped the future of ASPIRE and the potential for applying this model to support other
marginalised groups in HE.

Session 7.6b
Navigating religious diversity in higher education: Challenges and strategies
Dr Yosepha Tabib Calif, Rothschild Partnerships and Professor Dame Orna Sasson Levy,
Bar-Illan University
Oral presentation (30 minutes), Locomotion 2
How do academic institutions respond to the rise of religious identities and practices on
campus? How do diversity units and EDI leaders tackle the new challenges and demands
posed by religious students? In our conference presentation, we will explore three practices
that challenge traditional academic norms: gender segregation requested by Ultra-Orthodox
Jewish students, the wearing of the niqab by religious Muslim students, and demands for
prayer spaces from religious students of various minority groups. We will present different
strategies used by institutions based on their unique characteristics and collaborate with
attendees to develop new strategies together.


Session 7.7
Golden opportunities: Embedding intersectionality into your HE (gender equality)
action plan. A good practice sharing walkshop
Dr Leonie Jones and Dr Derek Wann, University of York
Walkshop session (60 minutes), Planet Suite
Considering gender equality through an intersectional lens provides golden opportunities for
strengthening the effectiveness of your gender equality action plan. This 'walkshop' will
guide you through a series of intersectional considerations, identify stubborn challenges,
spark ideas and crowdsource solutions and best practice. At the end of the workshop, you
will have a set of personalised next-steps and receive a copy of the crowdsourced
resources. The session will be presented by members of the Chemistry@York self-
assessment team and will draw on experience and examples from their recently renewed
Athena Swan Gold action plan.

Parallel Session 8, 15:40 - 16:20
Session 8.1
Practical Intersectionality: Is It Possible to Achieve Its Goals?
Professor Doyin Atewologun, Delta
Master class session (40 minutes), Stephenson Suite
While many understand the theoretical foundations of intersectionality, applying it in practice
often presents significant challenges. Is it too complex or our standards too high? Are you
faced with pushback in terms of its embedding – often from people who wish to be allies –
but not clear on where to invest their time.

In this masterclass, practitioners will engage have an opportunity to share some of their ‘live’
issues and delve into practical strategies for integrating intersectional approaches in various
professional settings, addressing common obstacles, and celebrating successes.
Participants will leave with actionable insights to enhance their practice and make
intersectionality a tangible reality in their work.


Session 8.2
Trust conversations
Sara Medel Jimenez, University of Edinburgh
Interactive workshop session (40 minutes), Northumbrian Suite
This workshop explores the critical role of trust in embedding effective EDI practices within
organisations. Trust is fundamental not only for fostering productive dialogues but also for
cultivating allyship. Through the session, participants will gain an active understanding of the
values and behaviours that underpin trust. Furthermore, attendees will reflect on their
personal interactions to identify and modify behaviours to strengthen trust in their
professional environments. By focusing on applying these insights, the workshop aims to
enhance participants' capability to contribute positively to their organisational culture,
promoting a more inclusive and empathetic workplace.

Session 8.3
Unconfernce session TBC
TBC
Unconfernce session (40 minutes), Rocket Suite
To be confirmed.

Session 8.4
Exploring imbalanced power dynamics in a research and academia context
Dr Maria Kariuki and Dr Keely Mills, British Geological Survey
Walkshop (40 minutes), Invicta
The foundations of modern research and education are deeply rooted in the principles
established during the early colonial period. For this session, we will explore how this legacy
has contributed to present-day inequities and intersectional societal systems that often profit
from, yet exclude, various communities. Drawing on examples of imbalanced power
dynamics from the STEM disciplines, we aim to open dialogue on navigating challenging
power dynamics in an equitable manner.

Session 8.5
“I Live and Breathe Intersectionality”: Discovering an intersectional ‘gaze’ for a fairer and
just world
Professor Anuj Kapilashrami, Professor - School of Health and Social Care, University of
Essex
Master class session (40 minutes), Locomotion 1
This masterclass is designed for senior leaders and practitioners in Higher Education (HE)
who are committed to fostering inclusive and equitable environments. “I Live and Breathe
Intersectionality” delves into the concept of intersectionality as a prism or ‘gaze’ to
understand society and the complex and interconnected nature of the issues/ challenges it
faces, and solutions it demands. Reflecting on some of the values, principles and types of
tools and approaches used, the session will explore how this perspective can be applied to
various aspects of their work, ranging from advocacy and activism, higher education,
organisation development, program/service design, and public policy.

By using intersectionality as a prism, leaders will not only gain insights into the unique
challenges and opportunities faced by individuals at the intersections of multiple social
categories but go beyond these to identify and tackle underlying power, privileges and
oppressions.

Session 8.6
Safe Spaces to discuss wicked problems, a masterclass on ways to address the awarding
gap
Syra Shakir, Leeds Trinity University
Master class session (40 minutes), Locomotion 2
This masterclass explores the work of co-creation in developing creative resources to
engage colleagues and students in anti-racist practice. Building on Ricardo Barker’s film
‘Re:Tension’, ‘Mind the Gap’ extends the co-creative process to sectoral co-creation. In
2024, I led a co-creation project with staff and students from LTU and with other London
based universities to gather student and staff voices around the degree awarding gap. The
output of this work is a film which was launched in January 2025. The film is a provocation
and a call to action to think about how pedagogy influences student success or indeed
perpetuates indifference, disengagement and the wicked problem of the awarding gap. This
masterclass will include screening particular scenes from the film, activities exploring
students’ lived realities at university versus our own perceptions, and grounded in student
voice, actions that staff can take to address the awarding gap in higher education.
