1




Royal Holloway EDI Annual Report (August 2023-July 2024)

Contents

    1.       Introduction. ...................................................................................................................................2
    2.       Our EDI Framework 2023-2028 and Guiding Principles. .............................................................4
         Our EDI Framework. ...........................................................................................................................4
         Towards our strategy, RH2030s.........................................................................................................4
    3.       EDI governance and structures. ....................................................................................................5
    4.       Moving on from 2022/23. ...............................................................................................................6
    5.       Diversifying our community..........................................................................................................7
    6.       Inclusive culture, infrastructure and environment. ....................................................................8
         Our People and Culture/Pulse Survey 2024. .....................................................................................8
         Equality Impact Assessments. ........................................................................................................ 10
         Our Staff Diversity Networks. ......................................................................................................... 10
         Learning and awareness. ................................................................................................................. 10
         Race equality. ................................................................................................................................... 11
         Accessible and inclusive campus. ................................................................................................... 13
         EDI events and celebrations. ........................................................................................................... 14
         Mental health and wellbeing. ......................................................................................................... 15
         Working with our local community. ............................................................................................... 17
    7.       Fair and inclusive recruitment.................................................................................................... 17
    8.       Development and progression................................................................................................... 18
    9.       External accreditation schemes and partnerships. .................................................................. 20
    10. Priorities for 2024/25. .................................................................................................................. 21
    Appendix 1 EDI Guiding Principles. .................................................................................................... 23
    Appendix 2 Workforce report (with pay gap reporting). .................................................................. 26
         Introduction. ..................................................................................................................................... 26
         Representation by protected characteristics. ............................................................................... 27
         Factors which influence representation. ........................................................................................ 35
         Pay gaps. ........................................................................................................................................... 45
    Appendix 3 Review of KPIs (Colleagues) ............................................................................................ 52
2



Terminology: We acknowledge all terms used around race/ethnicity have limitations.
Following community/network consultations, Royal Holloway uses the term Black and global
majority (BGM), though understanding the sensitivities and complexities involved and try
wherever possible to contextualise and disaggregate data/information.
Benchmarking: HESA data for 2023-24, accessed via Heidi Plus Gold, has been used for
benchmarking. We have conducted our benchmarking by aggregating data from ten
institutions comparable to ours in size, geography, and academic focus. This group, informally
known as the S10 University Network, includes Brunel, City, East Anglia, Essex, Goldsmiths,
Kent, Reading, Sussex, and Surrey.


1. Introduction.


At Royal Holloway, our vision is to cultivate a diverse and inclusive community where everyone
feels a sense of belonging, is supported to succeed, and is empowered to thrive. These
aspirations are at the heart of our EDI Framework 2023-2028, launched in 2023, which provides
a structured and coordinated approach to embedding equity, diversity, and inclusion across all
areas of our University. This framework extends beyond our legal obligations, ensuring that
EDI is infused into the culture and practices of the entire University community, maximising
the impact of our collective efforts.
This ambition for whole-University vision and efforts in our EDI work has additional resonance
as we work towards launching our new University strategy, RH2030s in autumn 2024. EDI is an
integral feature of the strategy, across all areas of our work, values, and vision. Along with so
many members of our community – students and colleagues – as an EDI team we have helped
to shape this directly and to ensure that voices from across the University are heard as part of a
co-creative process.
Building on the foundation of a strong EDI governance process and infrastructure established
in recent years, a key focus for 2023/24 has been the continued implementation of the aims
and objectives outlined in the EDI Framework. This includes empowering departments across
the University to adopt an ‘inclusion by design’ approach, embedding accessibility and
inclusion throughout their practices and processes.
A highlight of this year included achieving an Athena Swan Silver award in November 2023.
This award recognises significant progress and achievements in advancing gender equality
within higher education and research institutions, demonstrating implementation of impactful
initiatives to address gender disparities, sustained commitment and measurable outcomes.
The Silver award also recognises the ability to identify and respond to challenges, and the
showcasing of good practices that promote an inclusive and equitable culture for everyone.
We also achieved Disability Confident Leader status in the same month. Disability Confident is
a government scheme which recognises work done by employers to increase understanding of
and challenge attitudes towards disability, and remove barriers to disabled people and those
with long-term health conditions in the workplace. ‘Leader’ is the highest of the scheme’s
3



three levels, recognising that we are taking an active leadership role in encouraging and
helping other employers on their journey to becoming Disability Confident.
Action on EDI at Royal Holloway is fundamental to our vision, to be a University of Social
Purpose. This action is underpinned by our Values, which guide everything we do and drive
meaningful change that benefits our students, colleagues, and the wider community.
We also recognise that lasting, sustainable change requires visible leadership and a strong
commitment from senior leaders. In 2023/24, a key priority has been working closely with
senior leaders to empower them to visibly champion EDI initiatives and lead by example.
This year, we have successfully completed several projects identified as priorities in our
2022/23 Annual EDI Report, including:

•   Strengthening our Equality Impact Assessment (EIA) processes to ensure inclusivity in
    decision-making.
•   Enhancing support for parents and carers in the form of a peer support network and
    improvements to relevant policies and practices.
•   Achieving an Athena Swan Silver award (November 2023) and preparing for our Race
    Equality Charter submission (November 2024).
•   Expanding resources and initiatives to support accessibility and disability inclusion,
    including becoming a Disability Confident Leader (November 2023).
•   Achieving significant progress with the comprehensive revision of our promotions processes
    to make them more equitable, with recommendations in place.
•   Taking stronger action to address bullying and harassment with a focus on prevention,
    report and support.
•   Enhancing EDI training provision across the University including through development of a
    suite of micro-learning resources.
•   Re-launching our Conversations About Race initiative with Citizens UK, to foster open,
    supportive and impactful discussions.

As a University of Social Purpose, we are particularly attuned to the issues facing our local and
global communities in current times. World events and geopolitical shifts matter to us
individually and collectively. The University has worked to strengthen its support services for
colleagues, such as providing enhanced mental health resources, and creating spaces for
dialogue including regular meetings with student societies impacted by geopolitical events.
Colleagues also continue to work closely with our Students’ Union on these and other
initiatives, such as the Festival of Languages and Cultures, that bring our communities
together. Our commitment to fostering an inclusive, compassionate, and supportive university
community sits alongside another commitment – namely, to support open dialogue and
respectful debate. In upholding and promoting principles of freedom of speech and academic
freedom, we strive to bring care and understanding to where these principles intersect with
work on equality and inclusion, in line with our values of equity, inclusion, and respect for all.

This report covers key projects and initiatives from the year 2023/24, and reflects on our
performance against targets and KPIs. Undoubtedly, we have moved forwards, but much work
remains. As we reflect on the progress made this year, and the many challenges our
community continues to face, we remain steadfast in our commitment to fostering a
4



University where respect, equity and inclusion are lived values, shaping every aspect of our
community. This report highlights our achievements, ongoing work, and future priorities as we
continue on this vital journey.


2. Our EDI Framework 2023-2028 and Guiding Principles.

Our EDI Framework.
Our EDI Framework 2023-28 articulates our priorities and outlines how we will monitor
progress and measure impact. Our three aims are:

•   Aim 1: Achieve diversity in our staff and student body.
•   Aim 2: Establish an equitable and fair environment.
•   Aim 3: Ensure everyone is included and feels a sense of belonging.

These aims are accompanied by the following objectives:

•   Objective 1: Achieve proportionate representation of marginalised groups throughout
    Professional Services and the academy, and among decision-makers across the University.
•   Objective 2: Increase the diversity of our students across all levels of study.
•   Objective 3: Ensure all staff and students are supported to succeed and all barriers are
    identified and removed.
•   Objective 4: Ensure all physical and digital spaces are accessible, eliminating barriers to
    participation.
•   Objective 5: Empower all members of our community to understand, value and respect
    difference and be active bystanders.


Our EDI Framework is underpinned by six new EDI Guiding Principles (Appendix 1) that
support our EDI aims and set our foundation for conduct and culture. Our vision is that our
principles underpin all aspects of work and study at Royal Holloway, including what we do and
what we say, and are manifested in University structures, policies and everyday processes and
behaviours. Our work on providing solid and effective support and resources to empower our
community to ‘live our principles’ is continuing at pace, though we have a lot of work ahead.
We aspire to meet and go beyond our legal compliance requirements in our support of diverse
students and colleagues, in line with our values. A key underlying theme and focus of our work
continues to be for equity and inclusion to become ‘what we do’ in our everyday practices. We
are working hard to ensure colleagues and students have the support and tools to be able to
contribute to this change, making a difference to the culture at the University.


Towards our strategy, RH2030s.
Our EDI Framework 2023-2028 and Guiding Principles align with work to develop our strategy,
RH2030s, which will launch in the Autumn of 2024. Principles of equity and inclusion will also
underpin upcoming work towards becoming a values-led organisation, as we come together to
develop a clear sense of who we are and what we stand for.
5



Work is taking place with students, and with colleagues across academic and Professional
Services teams and other partners to co-create this new strategy. It is an opportunity to
understand our shared values and use these as the foundation to build our vision so that we
become a values-led University of Social Purpose – a university that focusses on what matters.


3. EDI governance and structures.


Our Vice-Chancellor and Principal Professor Julie Sanders, alongside our University Council,
have overall responsibility for equality. The EDI Committee, chaired by Professor Tracy
Bhamra, Provost and Pro-Vice-Chancellor (Global), continues to drive the development and
implementation of the Equality Framework 2023-2028. This group comprises colleagues from
across the University including from Professional Services, diversity Network leads, Equality
Group chairs and EDI Vice-Deans, who each lead one of our four central Equality Strategy
Working Groups.
Our EDI team in HR, comprising three full-time posts, supports all EDI initiatives and works
closely with the Vice-Deans for EDI (0.6 FTE) in each School. These colleagues lead on School-
based approaches and contribute to EDI leadership at University level. We are currently
working on establishing similar roles based in Professional Services. Each EDI Vice-Dean works
closely with their department EDI Champions, with School-level EDI Committees in place, with
representation from each department.
We have four University Equality Leads (0.1 FTE), each leading one of our Equality Groups
(Race, Gender, LGBT+, Disability). Our EDI structure is designed to:

•   Ensure diverse perspectives and lived experiences inform our work through network
    representation embedded throughout.
•   Facilitate focus on intersecting issues through Strategy Working Groups to accelerate
    transition from theory to action. Each focuses on one of four themes identified as key areas
    and chaired/co-chaired by one of our EDI Vice-Deans: Culture, Infrastructure, Recruitment,
    Progression.
•   Strengthen collaboration between colleagues and students with Students’ Union Vice-
    Presidents and student representatives participating in Equality Groups, the EDI
    Committee and education and student experience groups.


Our Strategy Working Groups include representation from Professional and Technical Services
colleagues who support local EDI work in these areas. Our seven new Student Inclusion
Collectives in the Students’ Union (Black and Global Majority, Disabled, International,
LGBTQ+, Mature, Carer/Parents, Students of Faith, Women) led by Community Officers, feed
into our structure.
6




      New Operation
                                              Executive Board

                                               EDI Committee
                                                                        Inclusive Education Board
       Equality Groups                     Strategy Working Groups
                                                                           Access work stream
     Disability Equality            Inclusive Culture & Environment      Success work stream
     LGBT+ Equality                 Inclusive Infrastructure             Progression work stream
     Race Equality                  Selection and Onboarding             Data work stream
     Gender Equality                Development and Progression


                                           Staﬀ Diversity Networks

                                              Student Collectives
       Staﬀ focus Staﬀ and Student focus                                              Student focus




Professional Services (PS) departments are at different stages on their journey towards
ensuring inclusion by design both through, and also within, their areas. All are working
towards playing effective roles in creating and supporting student/colleague belonging, and
achieving fair representation of marginalised groups.

The Library offers one example of local good practice and active collaboration with EDI
structures and governance. Our Director of Library, Learning Support & Culture established
and chairs the Library EDI group, a diverse forum which meets monthly, provides feedback on
central EDI Committee issues, feeds into Library strategy (e.g. diversification/decolonisation in
Collections, colleague diversity and belonging), and supports specific initiatives (e.g. external
Black Students’ Experiences in Academic Libraries project). The central EDI Team and student
Disability and Neurodiversity Services are regularly invited to contribute, to further strengthen
a joined-up approach. We will support extension of practices across Professional Services.


“The EDI strategy has been helpful in advancing culture and practice shift.” REC Survey 2024 open-
question (colleague).



4. Moving on from 2022/23.


Throughout 2022/23 work was focused on helping colleagues develop an inclusive mindset,
with the confidence to learn and act, championed by leaders and managers.
Specific targets for 2022/23 included:

•     Developing our EDI Framework and EDI Guiding Principles to bring a focus and coherence
      to our EDI work.
•     Carrying out an audit of our recruitment process to ensure it is fair and inclusive with
      barriers removed for all applicants.
7



•   Launching mandatory Inclusive Leadership Training for our managers acknowledging the
    crucial role managers play in setting and nurturing the culture and environment that is
    needed to support everyone to be their best.
•   Strengthening awareness around and support for peri/menopause.
•   Reviewing our academic promotions process to ensure it is fair and that we do all we can to
    remove barriers to progression.
•   Raising awareness around disability and access, including equipping our community with
    the knowledge to design accessible processes and practices.
•   Developing reporting processes for colleagues and students to report on incidents of
    bullying and harassment, both named and anonymously.

In 2023/24, 0ur priorities continued to centre around the themes of our four Strategy Working
Groups: selection and onboarding, inclusive culture and environment, inclusive physical and
digital infrastructure, and development and progression.


5. Diversifying our community.

Our students
Our student cohort has changed rapidly in size and diversity over the past few years. In
2023/24 we had 12,650 students, compared to 10,300 in 2017, and 83% of our current students
are undergraduates. Our student population has become more ethnically diverse, which may
reflect the increasing proportion of students that come from West and South London and the
hyper-diversity of London’s population. In 2023/24 51% were from Black and global majority
(BGM) backgrounds, and 32% were Asian.
Our colleagues

Representation of BGM colleagues increased by 1.1 percentage points to 21.6% compared to
2023. This figure has increased by 4.7 percentage points since 2019/20. The S10 average is
21%. However, we continue to see less diversity among colleagues than in our student
community.
The proportion of colleagues declaring a disability rose to 5.4% in 2024, following a decline to
4.9% in 2023. This figure remains below the S10 average of 9%. At the same time, however,
we have seen a sharp decline in turnover for disabled colleagues from 32.2% in 2023 to 11.4%
in 2024.
In 2023/24, 53.2% of colleagues were female: a slight increase since 2022/23 (52.5%). This is
lower than the S10 average, which is 57%.
The proportion of LGBT+ colleagues, which had decreased by 0.1 percentage points last year,
increased by 0.7 percentage points in 2024. The proportion of colleagues who preferred not to
record their sexual orientation has continued to decrease year on year and is now 24.1% (down
from 33.8% in 2019).
This year, we are able to report that 10 colleagues (0.5%) do not identify with their birth
gender, as this meets our reporting threshold of 10. This is on par with the sector 0.8%
(Advance HE statistical report 2024). 33.8% of colleagues did not disclose this information.
8



6. Inclusive culture, infrastructure and environment.


Our People and Culture/Pulse Survey 2024.

Consulting with our community to understand issues, design action and assess progress is
crucial. The People and Culture/Pulse Survey was conducted from 3 to 21 June 2024. This
interim survey complements the main People and Culture Survey, now conducted biennially,
with the next iteration scheduled for October 2025. The Pulse survey includes 11 core
questions, with additional questions focusing on key areas such as bullying and harassment,
which were included in this survey.

A total of 896 colleagues responded, representing a 47% response rate, lower than the 55%
achieved in the February 2023 full survey. For the first time, data for colleagues with a trans
history, and Chinese colleagues, are included due to higher reporting rates. Gender identity
reporting remains limited to men and women, as fewer than 10 respondents identified as non-
binary or ‘in another way’.

The percentage of respondents declaring protected characteristics decreased slightly across
most categories, except for religion. This leaves demographic data incomplete for around 1 in
5 respondents, and in some cases, as many as 1 in 4.

Highlights.
The eleven core survey questions focus on colleague satisfaction in areas such as alignment
with the University’s mission, feeling valued, work/life balance, open communication, and
mutual respect.
BGM colleagues responded more positively than White colleagues across all core questions,
with particularly notable differences in perceptions of leadership valuing people (65% vs. 44%)
and feeling recognised for their role’s value (70% vs. 51%). Among BGM groups, Black/Black
British and Chinese colleagues reported the highest positivity scores, at 87% and 86%
respectively.
Intersectionally, BGM men were more positive than BGM women (81% vs. 70%), with
significant gaps in perceptions of fair work allocation (83% vs. 61%) and role recognition (85%
vs. 65%). BGM academics and Professional Services (PS) colleagues had comparable positivity
rates (73% vs. 72%), with both groups reporting higher scores than White colleagues.
On average across the eleven questions, BGM academics were 14 percentage points more
positive than White academics, with six core questions showing differences of 16 percentage
points or more. Among PS colleagues, BGM respondents answered nine of the eleven core
questions more positively than White PS colleagues, with four questions showing differences
of ten percentage points or more.
Colleagues with a declared disability were less positive than those without (52% vs. 64%).
Differences were most pronounced in perceptions of roles providing ‘a sense of meaning and
purpose’ (61% vs. 78%), open communication (20% vs. 37%), and mutual respect (70% vs.
54%).
9



Disabled PS colleagues were 5 percentage points more positive than disabled academics, with
key differences in work/life balance and understanding institutional goals. No notable gender
differences were observed within this group.
Colleagues from smaller respondent demographic groups, including those identifying as queer
(45%), bisexual (56%), or of ‘any other religion’ (57%), scored below the University average
across the core survey questions. Queer colleagues reported significantly lower scores in key
areas such as leadership valuing people (14%), as well as work/life balance, recognition of the
value individuals bring, and fair work allocation (all at 36%). Bisexual colleagues also scored
notably lower than the University as a whole in feeling valued for their contributions (36% vs.
49%), while colleagues of ‘any other religion’ (including Buddhist, Jewish, and Sikh) reported
below-average scores for mutual respect (55% vs. 65%) and open communication across the
University (10% vs. 31%).


Bullying and harassment.
In line with the overall results, most demographic groups showed a rise in colleagues
responding ‘yes’ to being asked whether they had experienced or witnessed bullying and
harassment. The largest rise was among colleagues of ‘any other religion’. However, there is
an absence of demographic data that makes it difficult to fully assess the impact of bullying
and harassment on all groups.
As one example of local good practice, we piloted a Dignity Listener scheme in the School of
Life Sciences and the Environment (LSE). Trained Professional Services and academic
colleagues, identified as points of contact for confidential discussions around experiences
including discrimination, bullying and harassment. Colleagues in these roles listen to concerns
in an informal, safe and confidential environment, help navigate policies and procedures,
signpost to reporting routes, wellbeing support, offering opportunities to talk to someone
independent (including outside one’s department) and better understand possible next steps.


Conclusions.
• The survey results from BGM colleagues were very positive. Race equality was a key area of
   focus in the last year as we prepare to submit an application for the Race Equality Charter
   Mark in November 2024.
• The survey results from disabled colleagues suggest that a similar focus is needed to
   understand the key issues and take forward an equality action plan, including awareness-
   raising and training, and inclusivity by design.
• A similar focus is needed on inclusion, engagement and belonging for colleagues who
   identify as queer or bisexual, who reported less positive results than the University overall in
   both 2023 and 2024 People and Culture surveys.
• The increase in declaration of protected characteristics in relation to religion within the
   survey suggests growing awareness and importance of this for colleagues. A stronger focus
   on religion and belief in our EDI work may be needed in response, especially given recent
   world events and geopolitical shifts.
10



Equality Impact Assessments.
We have developed a comprehensive EIA policy and process, supported by synchronous
training designed for senior managers, Professional Services colleagues, and academic
colleagues directly involved in amending existing policies or developing new ones that impact
colleagues and/or students. This policy and training equip colleagues to assess the impact of
proposed changes systematically, ensuring that we identify and address existing or potential
inequities as part of our commitment to fostering equity and inclusion.
It is notable that EIA completion rates across Royal Holloway are increasing, with a new
Executive Board sub-committee reviewing all policies.


Our Staff Diversity Networks.
Our Networks are run by colleagues for colleagues, supported by the central EDI team.
Networks provide peer support, and constitute platforms for raising awareness and for
different voices to speak. They are also represented in our EDI governance structure, where
they influence the development of policies and processes. Network Chairs (0.1 work-relief)
meet regularly with Senior Leader champions to discuss challenges, required support.
We now have six thriving networks:

•    Black and Global Majority.
•    Disability and Mental Health.
•    LGBT+.
•    Parents and Carers.
•    Peri-Menopause.
•    Royal Holloway Women’s Network.


Learning and awareness.
We continue our work to strengthen our knowledge and capacity to create safe, respectful and
inclusive spaces across the University, through promoting existing mandatory EDI courses, and
through other forms of learning. Engagement from our senior leaders, who have completed
Inclusive Leadership training and are working on EDI objectives, is an important part of this
process.
A focus for 2024 has been to grow our library of micro-learning resources and added ‘Where
are you REALLY from? Microaggressions at work’ and ‘Becoming anti-racist’ to this collection
in early 2024. We have more work ahead to ensure micro-learning resources are used and in
turn are impactful.
We continue to offer Conversations About Race sessions, within departments and cross-
University sessions, and offered face-to-face Anti-Racism Allyship training (2024) to further
recruit and support facilitators. In 2024/25 we plan to procure Disability Awareness training,
and strengthen the impact of Inclusive Leadership for Managers training through promoting
initiatives developed as part of the course to foster inclusive practices within teams.
11



Race equality.

     “With the new leadership, the discourse has clearly and significantly shifted. It shows more
     urgency and seriousness.” REC Survey 2024 (colleague)


We continue to reflect deeply and critically on our role in perpetuating institutional racism. We
are aiming for a holistic, University-wide approach to effectively address race inequality, with
alignment on key projects and better collaboration between the central EDI team and local
teams. This will help us strengthen our understanding of, and response to, racism in higher
education.
Race Equality Group (REG).
Our Race Equality Group (REG) is chaired by Chris Howorth, Championed by Professor Tracy
Bhamra (Provost and Pro-Vice-Chancellor, Global) and now has cross-University membership.
It comprises colleagues who have been involved from the start of our Race Equality Charter
journey in 2014 as well as new voices following calls for interest via newsletters and emails,
and invitations for colleagues in specific roles to join.
We have synchronised projects across the University which directly impact the experiences of
our Black and global majority students and colleagues. We have representation from
colleagues working on key projects such as the Action and Participation Plan, the Academic
Promotion process review, student experience projects, University of Sanctuary initiatives and
more.

REG has become a point of convergence for ideas from across Royal Holloway. It has been a
catalyst for collaboration, unearthing and addressing gaps in data and activity, and will
continue to support and strengthen aligned activities. It is also leading our 2024 Race Equality
Charter (REC) submission.
Awarding gaps.
We have not reached our targets for reducing awarding gaps, although we are heading in the
right direction, with improvement each year since 2020-21. Key actions taken towards
reaching these targets include:

     •   Strengthening local action and accountability for awarding gaps through embedding
         awarding gap data within annual department reviews, with progress reports presented
         to central Quality Assurance and Standards Committee.
     •   Implementing a more systematic and joined-up approach to exploring and improving
         student belonging.
     •   Investing in new leadership posts in 2023/24 (Executive Director of Student Journey and
         Associate Pro-Vice-Chancellor for Inclusive Learning and Teaching) and increased FTE
         for EDI Vice-Deans from 0.4 to 0.6.


While we have concrete APP plans built around quantitative metrics set by the Office for
Students (OfS), we are using in-house expertise to further disaggregate and interrogate data
beyond the limits of the APP, to further enhance our understanding and achieve real change.
12



Diversity and culture for colleagues.
We are enormously proud to say we now have a majority BGM student body. We recognise
that we still need to do much more towards diversity among colleagues and, importantly, in
our key decision-making spaces.

Engagement has helped us to identify strategic priority areas for the future centred on culture,
belonging and trust. We must ensure training is immersive and impactful, so that we can be
confident that inclusive and anti-oppressive practices are embedded across the University. We
also need to work even harder to ensure that processes for reporting racist incidents are
trusted and effective, with more efforts focussed on prevention and clear follow-through.

Our sharp decline in colleagues involved in the disciplinary process suggests a culture shift,
with greater manager awareness around inclusive practice and unconscious bias; indeed,
feedback on our Inclusive Leadership for Managers programme (launched 2022/23) showed
significant increases in knowledge, with 22% of colleagues reporting ‘good knowledge’ pre-
course, 78% post-course. We have also launched new forms of learning, including micro-
learning resources and Conversations About Race.

Our University-wide Anti-Racism Action Plan will help us make the change we need and
support us as we continue our anti-racism journey.

REC Survey 2024: “[…] RHUL is willing to engage in the hard conversations around race.”
(REC Survey 2024 open-question (colleague)).


Race Equality Charter (REC) Survey 2024.
We carried out a REC Survey in February 2024. 585 colleagues responded: a 30% response
rate, compared to 13% in 2017. We communicated findings via internal newsletters with
articles by our Senior Race Equality Champion and REG Chair. Findings and actions were
discussed at REG, BGM staff Network, EDI Committee and Executive Board, with themes
further explored during student interviews. Paid student APP ambassadors provided
representation of key underrepresented groups (e.g. BGM, socio-economic deprivation,
commuting) in consultations; they also ran focus groups discussing current support for
success, progression, barriers, and suggestions for improvement.

Colleague perspective: REC Survey findings 2024.
The REC survey 2024 highlights significant disparities in colleagues’ experiences at Royal
Holloway based on race, gender, and role. BGM women academics report feeling more
respected and connected than White women academics, and than BGM women in
Professional Services, with the latter feeling the least connected overall.

Confidence in addressing racist behaviours and trust in reporting systems remains low,
particularly among BGM staff, who also express limited confidence in senior leaders' visibility
and accountability for race equality.

Few colleagues believe they can have open conversations about race, with BGM colleagues
reporting this significantly less than their White peers. Awareness of race equality initiatives is
13



also lower among BGM staff, especially in Professional Services roles, and fewer BGM
colleagues feel that cultural traditions are acknowledged or that social events are inclusive.

Open-ended responses emphasise the need to improve understanding of racism and foster
cultural change across the institution. Responses suggest awareness of positive EDI work, with
an increase in focus, attitude changes, student diversity, decolonisation work, communication,
wider strategy, local structures, events and training.

Student perspective: REC, NSS and Undergraduate Survey 2024 findings.
Fewer students participated in the 2024 REC Survey than previously (301 students, compared
to 360 in 2017), though we made sure we also conducted extensive consultation through
multiple channels, including broader initiatives such as the National Student Survey (NSS),
Postgraduate Taught Experience Survey (PTES), Postgraduate Research Experience Survey
(PRES), and our internal undergraduate survey, as well as numerous focus groups and
discussions related to the APP. Additionally, insights were gathered through the RH100 focus
group, and targeted interviews with BGM students.

The REC 2024 survey indicates that a sense of belonging among students, particularly BGM
respondents, is lower compared to results from the NSS 2024 and UG Survey 2024 (noting
substantially lower response rates for the REC survey). Fewer BGM students report feeling
connected to staff, with Black students feeling the least connected. This may be a feature of
the smaller sample size for the REC survey and as a self-selecting sample, the motivations to
complete it.

However, there are encouraging signs of progress. A comparison of survey data suggests new
interventions supporting students transitioning into higher education may be having a positive
impact, as Black UG students in their first two years report higher feelings of belonging
compared to students in their final year. In the NSS 2024, Black students showed a significant
improvement in positivity compared to 2023, alongside increased satisfaction levels across all
ethnic groups in the UG Survey 2024.

Despite these improvements, disparities persist. REC data shows low confidence among
students, especially BGM, in addressing racist behaviours or trusting senior leaders to do so.
Many students, particularly Black and Asian respondents, feel that Royal Holloway’s efforts to
tackle racial inequality and create inclusive social environments are insufficient. Additionally,
fewer students perceive opportunities to learn about different ethnicities and cultures or see
festivals and traditions acknowledged. Black students reported the highest rates of discomfort
due to race/ethnicity, paralleled by an increase in anonymous incident reporting over recent
years.

Open-ended responses highlight a perceived lack of representation of BGM staff and systemic
‘Whiteness’ embedded in the curriculum and institutional culture. Respondents call for
enhanced training for teaching staff to address race, Islamophobia, and antisemitism,
underscoring the need for further action in these areas.

Accessible and inclusive campus.
Our targeted increase in the proportion of disabled Professional Services colleagues at grade 9
and grade 10 has already been met, though not improved on since 2022/23. It is important we
14



continue to work to support progression of our colleagues and set a stretch target so we can
measure progress.
We are trying hard to strengthen our support for access and disability inclusion across the
institution, promoting greater awareness of everyone’s role in making everyday practices
accessible and inclusive. As part of this we launched our new Accessibility and Inclusion Hub in
November 2023 to provide colleagues with a central point of reference for all things
concerning accessibility and inclusion, encouraging colleagues to think about how they could
implement it in their work, both individually and as a team. The hub was socialised to teams
across the University throughout 2023/24. We now offer face-to-face accessibility training with
a focus on hosting inclusive meetings, writing accessible documents and designing accessible
webpages amongst other activities.
We still have further work ahead to ensure principles of access and inclusion are firmly
embedded at the start of and throughout all projects, with consultation with groups and
individuals who can bring lived experience perspectives to decision-making as a key part of
how we work.


EDI events and celebrations.

Throughout 2023/24 we marked a range of diversity dates and months. Highlights include:

•    ‘Decolonising the University’, hosted by Professor Jason Arday (Black History Month 2023);
     included ‘lightning talks’ from our six Schools, Library Services, Students’ Union,
     showcasing practical decolonisation/diversification work across Royal Holloway. This event
     examined the necessity for and challenges around decolonising our higher education
     institutions and curricula, as well as providing examples of best practice.

•    Disability and Youth Panel Event (Disability History Month 2023). Guest speakers included
     a range of disability rights activists, campaigners and writers such as Nina Tame, Amy
     Kavanagh, and Pippa Stacey.

•    Bisexual Men exist: A conversation with Vaneet Mehta (LGBT History Month 2024) which
     included a discussion on the issues and barriers that bisexual+ men face.

•    The Significance of Joy and its Impact on LGBTQIA+ Mental Health (Pride 2024). Dominic
     Davies, founder of Pink Therapy, spoke on the profound significance of joy and its
     transformative impact on mental health of our LGBTQIA+ students and colleagues.
15




 ‘Decolonising the University: A conversation with Professor Jason Arday, also featuring our
               Vice-Chancellor and Principal, and Students’ Union President.


We continue to visually mark diversity months through providing variations on our University
logo with guidance for staff on how to use these in email signatures. The image below shows
from left to right, logos to mark Disability History Month, Black History Month, Women’s
History Month and Pride Month. The logos have also been used as social media avatars across
the University’s various platforms:




Mental health and wellbeing.

During the academic year 2023/24, we prioritised the training and development of line
managers and leaders to increase awareness of mental health in the workplace. We engaged a
specialist supplier to deliver six one-day in-person courses designed to empower managers
and leaders to recognise the signs and symptoms of poor mental health, understand when and
how to intervene, and know how the University can support individuals on their journey to
wellness. These courses were extremely well attended by colleagues from across the
University community, with 61 delegates completing the training. Feedback was
overwhelmingly positive, and as a result, we will continue offering these courses throughout
the academic years 2024/25 and 2025/26.

Additionally, we offer a Mental Health Awareness course for student-facing staff, focussing on
our institution-wide responsibility for student mental health and wellbeing. This training helps
colleagues to respond sensitively and direct students to appropriate support. Two sessions
were held during in 2023/24, which were very well attended and received highly positive
feedback.
16



In 2024, we established a working group comprised of both Professional Services and
academic colleagues. This group has developed a proactive and preventative ‘whole person,
whole organisation’ approach to staff and student wellbeing, aligning our efforts to support
both groups. We identified several strengths, challenges, opportunities, and potential threats
to wellbeing across the University.

Alongside this, we provided a range of mental health and wellbeing support initiatives,
including resources for World Mental Health Day (October 2023), Men’s Health Month
(Movember, November 2023), a feature article on our intranet, and supporting guidance for
Mental Health Awareness Week (May 2024). We also offered in-house services such as
massage and reflexology, regular campus woodland walks, wellbeing updates and tips
(including on stress awareness, winter wellness, and self-care), occupational health support,
and access to our 24-hour Employee Assistance Programme.

Our focus moving forward is to build upon these initiatives with a renewed emphasis on
aligning them with the University’s strategic enablers for People, Culture, and Inclusion. Our
goal is to foster a vibrant, diverse, and inclusive community where all members feel
empowered, valued, and inspired to reach their full potential. By doing so, we aim to have a
positive impact on both local and global communities, with a particular focus on promoting a
sense of wellbeing and belonging for the entire University community. We are committed to
ensuring inclusivity by design and fostering a safe, supportive, and inclusive environment for
all.

As a University, we recognise that good mental health and wellbeing are essential for the
success and wellbeing of both our students and staff. Our ambition is to cultivate a supportive
community where colleagues are equipped with the knowledge, training, and resources to
promote positive mental wellness. We are committed to creating an environment where staff
feel confident in preventing workplace factors that may contribute to mental ill-health. We
aim to foster a safe and nurturing space that encourages wellbeing, compassion, creativity,
and high performance, and provide relevant information and guidance to support national and
international awareness days related to all aspects of health and wellbeing.

Ultimately, we seek to develop an inclusive, informed, and compassionate community that
supports a balanced and flexible approach to work and life, ensuring that everyone’s voice and
needs are heard and respected.



A peri/menopause-friendly University.
We continue to provide support and guidance to colleagues experiencing menopause
symptoms in the workplace, through our Peri/menopause Network which launched in
November 2022, Menopause Awareness training for Managers, a range of workshops, and
continue to build and promote our Menopause Hub which includes an array of internal and
external sources of support and guidance. To mark World Menopause Day in October 2023,
17



which focused on cardiovascular health, we organised a talk on ‘Understanding and Embracing
the Menopause’ and offered free onsite Body Composition Testing.


Working with our local community.
Royal Holloway hosts a termly forum with representatives from the local community (e.g.
Councillors, Residents Associations, community leaders) to work together on issues impacting
marginalised communities. We meet regularly with local Police to respond to immediate
concerns, who also offer drop-in campus sessions. We are a member of the Surrey Police Hate
Crime taskforce working group, reporting information shared by students. Members of
Executive Board, including our Vice-Chancellor and Principal, and Students’ Union meet
regularly with student societies to understand their needs and support students impacted by
local or world events. In November 2024 we hosted the Surrey Interfaith Forum, with
community partners including faith leaders and County Council representatives, to strengthen
relationships of trust for future collaboration.




A University of Social Purpose: University of Sanctuary.
We strive to become a place of safety, solidarity and empowerment for people seeking
sanctuary and are applying for formal University of Sanctuary status. We are driven to
understand, address and share the challenges people face in seeking sanctuary to pursue
Higher Education. This is reflected in our research and teaching, and in our broader work as a
University of Social Purpose.
As part of our collaborative work with the Higher Education Outreach Network (HEON – our
local Uni Connect partner) and Big Leaf Foundation, we work with local universities to improve
young people’s knowledge and skill focussing on refugees and asylum-seekers in the local
area.
We plan to launch ‘University of Social Purpose PhD Studentships’ in October 2024 and in
2023/24, increased our funding to support displaced academics and students.
The Sanctuary Scholarship and Friendly Hand Bursary provide HE access for students
fleeing persecution and seeking asylum in the UK with a full tuition fee waiver and support
with living costs. We maintain relationships and support all our Sanctuary alumni scholars.




7. Fair and inclusive recruitment.


Recruitment data highlights the need for continued efforts to attract a more diverse applicant
pool and ensure that decision-making processes remain fair and free from bias. Encouragingly,
the proportion of applications from women, Black and global majority (BGM) applicants, UK
applicants, disabled applicants, and LGBT+ applicants has increased since last year.
18



While shortlisting rates for BGM applicants remain lower than for other groups, offers made to
BGM candidates, overseas applicants, disabled candidates, LGBT+ applicants, and women
exceeded the proportion of colleagues currently employed in these groups. This indicates that
recruitment efforts are contributing to workforce diversification, albeit at varying rates.
To support an inclusive culture, we continue working to ensure new colleagues feel equipped
and empowered to contribute to a welcoming and supportive environment. We have
developed guidance for academic and Professional Services applicants, as well as for selection
panels, on writing Diversity Statements — reflective statements that outline an applicant’s
experiences, knowledge, and reflections on equality, diversity, and inclusion (EDI) and how
these have shaped their personal and professional growth. These statements provide
prospective colleagues with the opportunity to demonstrate their awareness of EDI’s
importance, their willingness to engage with these issues, and how they might contribute to
fostering an inclusive environment at Royal Holloway, enhancing the experience and sense of
belonging for all colleagues and students.
We continually emphasise the importance of panel diversity but see a difference in practices
across the University. As panel diversity does not guarantee bias-free interviews, we extended
training to all panellists, not just the Chair. We are further improving training design to help
panels create collaborative and inclusive environments that will enable them to reach fair and
unbiased decisions. This includes a focus on counteracting groupthink, supporting less
dominant voices, recognising disadvantage built in to external systems and considering a
broader range of impact measures. In 2024/25 we will also review shortlisting process to
ensure fair outcomes.



Recruitment – some key highlights.
White applicants, UK applicants and female applicants show the highest offer rate, with
international applicants, men and Black and global majority applicants the lowest offer rate.
Disabled applicants are more likely to be shortlisted than non-disabled applicants, with similar
offer (from shortlisting) rates.
Black and global majority applicants are less likely to progress than White applicants at both
stages of shortlisting and interview.




8. Development and progression.

The development and progression of our colleagues is a key focus. Promotion data shows that
further targeted work is needed. For example, there is under-representation in the
professoriate for women, and colleagues from Black and global majority (BGM) backgrounds.
Colleagues from BGM backgrounds are also underrepresented in Professional Services roles
for grades 9 and 10. Fair representation of BGM colleagues at senior levels is also very slow to
change, and action is needed to address markedly lower success rates in the academic
promotion process.
19



An extensive review of the current Academic Promotions took place throughout 2023/24 and is
ongoing. This included engagement sessions with over 130 colleagues, and a benchmarking
survey with 49 UK universities. Three working groups were formed to look at training, panels
and criteria, and develop proposed changes. A steering group formed, chaired by Professor
Tracy Bhamra, Provost and Pro Vice-Chancellor (Global), reviewed the ﬁndings and made
recommendations to Executive Board.

With primary revisions scheduled for December 2024, feedback on issues such as anonymity
and transparency led to some changes being implemented earlier. The proposal to remove
anonymity in applications was presented to the University and College Union (UCU) in October
2023, with follow-up discussions in November. Broader consultation with the wider University
revealed that only 12.7% of colleagues expressed significant concerns. To address potential
bias, measures such as strengthened EDI training, revised School panel structures, external
panel members, and pre-scoring by panel members will be introduced. We will make sure we
evaluate the impact of changes to the process. We are also introducing EDI leadership as part
of the criteria so that this work is acknowledged and rewarded as appropriate.

We continue to engage with the London Higher Global Majority Mentoring programme. Since
2022/23, 12 colleagues (academics/PTO) have engaged as mentors/mentees.

Extract, LHGMP Impact report: “[…] fantastic next steps from participants, such as Dr Anusha
Seneviratne (RHUL) and her mentor Dr Kalpana Surendranath (University of Westminster),
who are submitting a joint research grant application with a view to long-term collaboration.
Anusha has also since guest lectured at Westminster at Kalpana’s invitation.”

In 2023 we made the decision to stop offering Mandala, a career and personal development
programme for BGM colleagues seeking promotion to senior roles. Between 2019 and 2021
Mandala ran at full capacity (12 per cohort) – achieved through extending participation to
colleagues at Surrey and Reading universities – but dropped to half capacity in 2022.The
reasons for the drop in attendance are unclear, though could include: emergence from Covid-
19 lockdowns, readjustment to face-to-face spaces; a perception that the programme
focussed on individuals rather than systemic change; and concerns over high workloads,
especially due to programme length.

 A comprehensive review assessing impact suggested Mandala was a positive development
intervention with longer-term impact on development at Royal Holloway. The review also
demonstrated how important the context is in which Mandala sits so that it is supported to
achieve its career development objectives. Specifically, delegates commented on the shortage
and invisibility of a coherent anti-racism strategy as a backdrop to Mandala, with many
programme conversations focused on what Royal Holloway should be doing to support them,
without clear pathways to take these ideas forward.

Our anti-racism strategy now provides more clarity in these areas. As part of this anti-racism
strategy, and to address these concerns, we will ensure all activities to support development
and progression of BGM colleagues have clear presentation and articulation of the anti-racism
strategy and place the activity within this context. We will continue to find ways to offer
community-building and peer support which were experiences associated with Mandala, and
develop a wider range of development options, including:
20



     •   Support for BGM Early Career Academics.
     •   Access to role models.
     •   Ensuring academic probation advisers have training to understand how to support
         career development for BGM Early Career Academics.
     •   Building dialogue with BGM colleagues to understand different learning needs and
         priorities and how these can be met effectively through a more diverse offering,
         including through cohort-based activities which create safe space for reflection and
         exploration.

Academic promotion data (aggregated over 2019 – 2024 to enable reporting, with the
exclusion of 2021, when the promotion process did not take place).
52.7% of the applications for promotion to Professor were from female colleagues,
significantly higher that their overall representation of 41.8% at grade 9.
Analysis shows that female candidates were more successful than male candidates in
applications for every role level.
The proportion of promotion applications from Black and global majority colleagues was lower
than from the average overall population at grades 8 and 9 in this period (18.6%, compared to
21.8%).
The proportion of applications to Professor from Black and global majority colleagues was
22.1%, higher than the average proportion at grade 9 which was 19.8%. The proportion of
Black and global majority applications for promotion to both Reader and Senior Lecturer were
lower than the corresponding proportion of BGM colleagues at grade 8 and grade 9.
Overall success rates for Black and global majority colleagues in the academic promotion
process are still lower than for White colleagues, with the gap widening to 6.3 percentage
points.
The gap between Black and global majority and White colleague success rates in applications
to Professor is 8.9 percentage points. Success rates for applications for roles at Reader level
remain higher at 3.2 percentage points, although this is a slight decrease on 2022/23 figures.
For applications to Senior Lecturer roles, success rates for Black and global majority
candidates have fallen below those of White candidate at 53.8%, compared to 59.2%.

9. External accreditation schemes and partnerships.

We continue to use external accreditation frameworks to critically reflect on our progress and
ensure our equality work is both focused and impactful. Since renewing our Bronze Athena
Swan and Race Equality Charter (REC) awards in 2017 and 2019, respectively, we achieved a
Silver Athena Swan award in November 2023 and are now working towards a Silver REC
award. In 2023, we also became a Disability Confident Employer. As a Stonewall Champion,
we remain committed to advancing our LGBT+ action plan to support colleagues and students,
including a focus on bi and trans communities, which are often marginalised within the LGBT+
spectrum.
21



Moving forward, we will continue our journey with these charters, using them as frameworks
to drive and accelerate meaningful change. However, our ultimate goal is to develop an
approach to tackling inequality that extends beyond awards and external recognition, ensuring
long-lasting and transformative progress.




                                                               .


Table 5 Accreditation schemes and partnerships.

  Africa Charter 20241
  Athena Swan University Silver 2023; 4 Silver, 4 Bronze departments/Schools.
  Disability Confident Leader 2023.
  HR Excellence in Research 2023.
  Race Equality Charter Bronze 2015, renewed 2019
  Stonewall WEI Gold award, Top 100 Employer 2023.
  White Ribbon Accreditation since 2021.
  Signatory Technician Commitment since 2017.
1 The Charter champions decolonising knowledge production, building sustainable research

capacity in Africa, fostering equitable/productive international partnerships, contributing to
diverse/innovative solutions to global challenges.




10. Priorities for 2024/25.

We remain dedicated to diversifying our community of colleagues, fostering a fair and
equitable environment, and ensuring that everyone feels included and experiences a genuine
sense of belonging. While progress has been made, it has not been at the pace we aspire to,
and we recognise the need for stronger structures and deeper cultural change to drive
meaningful and sustained impact.
To achieve this, we will strengthen our EDI structures across the University, embedding a
culture of commitment to equality and inclusive practices. This includes establishing dedicated
EDI structures within Professional Services and enhancing the leadership and influence of our
four equality groups. By working closely with our Senior Leadership Team, we aim to further
support them in championing and embedding equality work at all levels of the institution.
22



Additionally, we recognise the need to formally acknowledge and reward contributions to EDI,
ensuring that this work is valued.
A key focus for the coming year will be improving our workplace culture, particularly in
addressing bullying, harassment, and discrimination. We need to build trust in our reporting
processes, ensuring that individuals feel confident in the effectiveness of procedures designed
to uphold dignity and respect within our community. Strengthening both preventative
measures and follow-through actions is essential. Furthermore, we will foster an inclusive
culture that respects and values all religions, ensuring that individuals of all faiths and beliefs
feel welcomed and supported, with particular attention to Islamophobia and antisemitism.
Recruitment remains a critical area for accelerating workforce diversification. We will take
deliberate steps to ensure equitable shortlisting outcomes, addressing disparities in the
selection process. Specific attention will be given to underrepresentation in the professoriate,
particularly among women and colleagues from Black and global majority backgrounds. We
also recognise the need to address the lack of diversity in senior Professional Services roles at
grades 9 and 10. As we continue to review the impact of recent changes to the promotions
process, we will prioritise developing a range of career development opportunities, including
tailored support for Early Career Researchers (ECRs), creating safe spaces for reflection and
professional growth.
At the heart of all our efforts remains our vision to be a University of Social Purpose,
leveraging education, research, and student experience as catalysts for social change. Our goal
is to contribute to a more inclusive society and a better future for generations to come.
We will continue our commitment to ensuring that all students, regardless of background,
have equal opportunities to access and succeed in higher education, and to progress toward
the personal, social, and economic benefits it provides. This includes a strong focus on
reducing awarding gaps and fostering a sense of belonging throughout our community.
Equitable access to inclusive career support is also key, enabling students to explore their next
steps, build skills, and engage with opportunities that will shape their futures. Additionally, we
will prioritise dismantling barriers to access and inclusion at the postgraduate level, fostering a
supportive academic and personal environment where all students can thrive.
Through these collective efforts, we will continue driving forward a culture of inclusion, equity,
and belonging, ensuring that our University remains a place where every individual –
colleagues and students alike – can succeed and feel valued.
23



Appendix 1 EDI Guiding Principles.
                                      Principle                                                      What can I do (resources)
 1. Collective responsibility for EDI, with senior leaders visibly championing       •    Complete mandatory and optional EDI training
 and role-modelling our EDI principles.                                              •    Assess the impact of new policies, initiatives and
 All members of our University community have collective responsibility for               decisions by carrying out Equality Impact
 establishing a safe, nurturing and inclusive environment where unacceptable              Assessments.
 behaviour is challenged and everyone feels welcome and valued.                      •    Access good practice EDI Guides
                                                                                     •    Dignity at Work Policy
 Leadership decisions and behaviours will visibly exemplify and actively embody      •    Grievance Policy
 our University values and EDI Principles.                                           •    RH Be Heard
                                                                                     •    Allyship training (mandatory)
 Our University has a zero approach to any form of bullying, discrimination and      •    LGBT allyship (gender identity) and LGBT allyship
 harassment, including but not limited to the protected characteristics covered by        (sexuality) training.
 the Equality Act 2010. All members of the University community will strive to       •    Bullying and harassment training (mandatory)
 prevent instances of discrimination by being active bystanders and through
 reporting instances of inappropriate behaviours.

 It is also acknowledged that people are positioned differently with different and
 unequal access to power and to opportunities to make a difference.
 2. Equality of Opportunity                                                           •   Engage with and reflect on training around
 Equality doesn’t mean treating everyone the same, but acknowledging that                 leadership and management processes, including
 people have different and diverse needs, ensuring the playing field is level so that     recruitment and academic promotion.
 everyone has the opportunity to succeed.                                             •   Seek out missing voices in decision-making
                                                                                          spaces.
 We will recognise and reward EDI labour through processes including PDRs,           •    Understand what positive action means
 promotions and recruitment.                                                         •    Access good practice EDI Guides, including
                                                                                          around reasonable adjustments.
 3. Commitment to developing an inclusive mindset with the                           •    Complete EDI Training
 confidence to learn and act, championed by leaders and managers.                    •    Managers complete Inclusive Leadership training
                                                                                     •    Access good practice/Allyship guides
                                                                                                                                               23
24



                                     Principle                                                        What can I do (resources)
 The University is committed to supporting staff and students to develop the           •   EDI Calendar
 confidence to engage with new perspectives and the commitment to make a               •   Access library of Bitesize training (coming soon)
 positive impact on University culture.                                                •   Pick up a LGBT+ Progress lanyard

 Formal training opportunities alongside safe conversational spaces are available
 to encourage people to develop an ‘inclusive mindset’ characterised by traits
 including open-mindedness, respectful curiosity, cultural competence, kindness,
 empathy. These trains are developed by cultivating an ability to ask questions        For Leaders and Managers:
 and listen to answers, working with a diverse team, and the self-awareness to         • Mandatory Inclusive Leadership training (coming
 understand one’s own privilege and bias                                                   soon)
                                                                                       • Access policies and guidance
 Leaders and Managers play a key role in creating and sustaining a diverse,            • Engage with EDI training opportunities (including
 collegiate and supportive culture within their teams and the University at large          non-mandatory, such as menopause awareness
 and, will be equipped to ensure everyone feels they belong, are engaged and               training)
 supported to be the best they can be.                                                 • Good practice/Allyship guides (includes
                                                                                           menopause, transitioning at work, reasonable
 Colleagues and students are encouraged to seek out opportunities and take                 adjustments).
 responsibility for ‘self-education’ to understand and value different perspectives,
 recognise and challenge inappropriate behaviours and maintain a growth
 mindset.

 4. Hearing and respecting lived experiences and encouraging diverse                   •   Engage with Royal Holloway events that mark key
     perspectives                                                                          diversity dates and that focus on exploring
 Truly listening to and valuing the lived experiences of our staff and students who        disadvantage and lived experience. These are
 come from marginalised backgrounds is key to enhancing understanding and                  promoted in the staff newsletter and on social
 empathy beyond one’s own lived experience, and identifying meaningful action              media.
 to take. EDI must be embedded at local level through conversations within             •   Engage with the Conversations About Race
 schools, departments and teams.                                                           initiative (coming soon).


                                                                                                                                               24
25



                                      Principle                                                   What can I do (resources)
 Missing perspectives need to be sought out to ensure all (decision-making)          •   Seek out missing voices in decision-making
 spaces include diverse voices, to prevent perspectives being overlooked and to          spaces.
 ensure that opinions and decisions are challenged with fair outcomes. This is to
 be achieved by including more people, rather than overburdening and tokenising
 existing staff.

 5. Be aware of multiple overlapping inequalities and integrate                      •   Engage in events that explore the concept of
    intersectionality into practice.                                                     intersectionality. These are promoted in the staff
                                                                                         newsletter and social media.
 Data will be considered through an intersectional lens so that we can look at       •   Understand the concept of intersectionality by
 multiple characteristics where possible to better acknowledge, understand and           watching this 2-minute video featuring Professor
 address the different and overlapping inequalities that impact our staff and            Kimberle Crenshaw.
 students to ensure nobody falls through the margins. It is also important to seek
 out and understand the stories and experiences that complement the data to
 further help us develop empathy and connectedness and take action.

 The concept of intersectionality describes the ways in which systems of
 inequality based on gender, race, ethnicity, sexual orientation, gender identity,
 disability, class and other forms of discrimination “intersect” to create unique
 dynamics and effects.

                                                                                     •   Assess the impact of new policies, initiatives and
                                                                                         decisions by carrying out Equality Impact
                                                                                         Assessments.
                                                                                     •   Ally to check and improve accessibility of Moodle
                                                                                         content.
                                                                                     •   Accessibility checklist to support colleagues
                                                                                         creating webpages, including images, video and
                                                                                         pdfs.
                                                                                                                                              25
26



Appendix 2 Workforce report (with pay gap reporting).
Introduction.

This rest of this report presents data showing the diversity and representation of salaried
colleagues – the group indicated in figure 1 below. The data includes all colleagues with an active
contract on 31 July 2024, and therefore includes colleagues on unpaid parental leave and unpaid
sickness.


     Employment         Example post            July 2023          July 2024              HESA
     arrangement           titles                                                         return
         Salaried      Regular, ongoing      1832 headcount                                 Yes
        contracts        employment          (main post only) 1893 headcount
                          Lecturer,            1677 FTE (all (main post only)
                          manager,                posts)        1747 FTE (all
                        administrator,                             posts)
                          customer
                           services

                                                                         Figure 1 – salaried colleagues



Data for this group is presented to enable identification of solutions in relation to its needs and
employment context. Different analysis is needed for hourly-paid colleagues including visiting
teachers, which steers towards more targeted solutions for the needs of this group.
The report gives an overview by protected characteristic, with a snapshot date of 31 July 2024
used in relation to the data reported for 2023-2024. For location, it is also based on the primary
organisational home of a colleague, rather than job role.
We report on colleagues’ sex (female/male) rather than their gender (e.g. man/woman/ non-
binary) as this is what the university currently collects from colleagues due to the requirement to
return this information to HM Revenue and Customs, which requires legal sex information to be
known for all colleagues. We recognise sex does not equate with gender and that gender is not
binary, and we aspire to enhance our data collection and reporting on gender data in the future.
MyView has been updated to capture these fields, and communications have taken place
encouraging colleagues to share this and other EDI related information.
The term “LGBT+” is used throughout the report, although data relating to sexual orientation
does not include gender identity. The term is used to demonstrate inclusivity of transgender
colleagues, even though this data does not demonstrate reflection of transgender
representation.
HESA data for 2023/24, accessed via Heidi Plus Gold, has been used for benchmarking. We have
conducted our benchmarking by aggregating data from ten institutions comparable to ours in
size, geography, and academic focus. This group, informally known as the S10 University


                                                                                                          26
27



Network, includes Brunel, City, East Anglia, Essex, Goldsmiths, Kent, Reading, Sussex, and
Surrey.
Data sharing principles have been applied, and analysis is not shown for groups where fewer than
10 individuals are represented. For this report the Senior Leadership Team comprising the Vice-
Chancellor and Pro Vice-Chancellors has been grouped under Academic Schools and
Departments.



Representation by protected characteristics.


Sex.

1.   Figure 2 shows that in July 2024 53.2% of the workforce were female, representing a slight
     increase since the previous year. This is lower than the S10 average, which is 57%.

                     Figure 2: Representation by sex, 2020-24
        2024

        2023

        2022

        2021

        2020

              0.0%       20.0%   40.0%     60.0%    80.0%   100.0%
                 2020        2021        2022      2023     2024
       Female    52.7%       52.8%       52.5%     52.5%    53.2%
       Male      47.3%       47.2%       47.5%     47.5%    46.8%




2.   Figure 3 shows changes to representation of female colleagues at different grades in the
     university between 2022 and 2024. The proportion of female professors has remained
     relatively stable and is at 33.2%, a marginal increase since 2022, and lower than the S10
     benchmark of 35%; while the proportion of female colleagues at grade 10 has seen an overall
     drop from 45.8% to 41.7%. The proportion of female staff at grade 9 has remained relatively
     unchanged. The highest proportion of female colleagues continues to be at grade 6.




                                                                                                  27
28




                      Figure 3 - change in representation of female staff by
                                        grade, 2022-2024
          80%
          70%
          60%
          50%
          40%
          30%
          20%
          10%
           0%
                    RHUL 4      RHUL 5       RHUL 6          RHUL 7    RHUL 8   RHUL 9   Professor   RHUL 10
                     (41)        (146)        (156)           (188)     (214)    (149)     (81)        (15)
             2022    65.6%       62.9%       73.9%           57.0%     49.9%    44.0%     32.7%      45.8%
             2023    57.5%       60.7%       73.7%           57.1%     49.8%    43.1%     33.3%      54.2%
             2024    53.9%       64.3%       75.4%           57.3%     52.7%    44.1%     33.2%      41.7%

                                                      2022      2023   2024


             *Numbers in brackets represent staff numbers as at 31 July 2024.




Sex and ethnicity.

3.   As of 31 July 2024, a slightly higher proportion of female colleagues (22.1%; up from 21.7% in
     2023) were from a Black and global majority background than male colleagues (21.1%; up
     from 19.2% in 2023). We are slightly above S10 benchmarking for BGM women (19%) and
     slightly below for BGM men (22%). This distribution was reflected differently in Academic
     Schools and departments and in Professional Services. In Academic Schools and
     departments, representation is higher than the S10 benchmark of 23%, with 25.8% of the
     female colleagues from a Black and global majority background (25.1% in 2023). This
     compares to 19.8% of male colleagues (17.4% in 2023), which is much lower than the S10
     benchmark of 26%. In Professional Services, 23.5% of male colleagues were from a Black and
     global majority background (22.3% in 2023), compared to 19.0% of female colleagues (18.8%
     in 2023).


Gender identity.

4. This year, we are able to report that 10 colleagues (0.5%) do not identify with their birth
   gender, as the number meets our reporting threshold of 10. Additionally, 33.8% of colleagues
   did not disclose this information. Fields relating to gender identity and pronouns were made
   available within MyView in April 2024 and we are working on communications to encourage
   colleagues to keep all of their EDI data up to date.


Ethnicity.

5.   Representation of Black and global majority colleagues has increased from 16.9% in 2020 to
     21.6% in 2024. The S10 benchmark is 21%.
                                                                                                               28
29



                 Figure 4 – staff representation by ethnicity, 2020 - 2024
     2024
     2023
     2022
     2021
     2020
                                   2020        2021           2022      2023       2024
      Black & Global Majority     16.9%       17.4%          19.4%     20.5%       21.6%
      White                       79.4%       78.9%          76.7%     75.7%       74.7%
      Prefer not to say            3.7%           3.8%       3.9%      3.8%         3.6%


     The second-largest ethnic group after White is Asian (10.2%), reflecting an increase of 0.6%
     since 2023 and 2.2% since 2022. Representation among other ethnic groups is as follows:
     Mixed ethnicity (3.1%), Chinese (3.4%), Black (2.9%), Arab (0.7%), and ‘Other’ ethnicities
     (1.4%). There has been an overall increase in representation across all Black and global
     majority groups, except for Mixed ethnicity, which has remained relatively unchanged since
     2023, and 'Other.' The slight decrease in the 'Other' category is likely due to 'Arab' now
     exceeding the reporting threshold of 10 individuals.

6. The increase in representation in Black and global majority colleagues is reflected in
   Academic Schools and Departments and in Professional Services. Following a 1.6
   percentage point increase in 2023 of Black and global majority academics to 20.8%, we see a
   further increase to 22.5% in 2024. The increase in Black and global majority colleagues in
   Professional Services is 0.5 percentage points to 20.1% in 2023, and to 20.6% in 2024.

7.   Figure 5a shows that the proportion of Black and global majority colleagues has increased
     across all grades, slightly more prominently at grade 8, with a 2.3 percentage point rise since
     2023.



        Figure 5a – change in representation of Black and global
               majority colleagues by grade, 2022 -2024
      30%
      25%
      20%
      15%
      10%
       5%
       0%
             RHUL 4   RHUL 5   RHUL 6   RHUL 7      RHUL 8    RHUL 9 Professor
              (20)     (53)     (41)     (69)        (115)     (73)    (244)
      2022   16.7%    22.0%    15.0%      19.4%     23.0%      20.2%    11.2%
      2023   24.5%    22.3%    17.7%      19.8%     26.0%      20.3%    10.6%
      2024   26.3%    23.3%    19.8%      21.0%     28.3%      21.6%    11.9%


                                        * Actual numbers for population size in 2024 in brackets


                                                                                                   29
30



     8. A consideration of ethnicity and grade for academics shows that the highest representation
        of Black and Global majority colleagues is at grade 8 (34.1%) an increase of 4.5 percentage
        points since 2023. We see a slight increase in grade 9 from 21.8% to 22.4%. We also see a
        slight increase for Professor from 10.6% to 11.9%, though lower than the S10 benchmark
        which is 16%.


            Figure 5b – Academics: change in representation of Black and
                   global majority colleagues by grade, 2022 -2024
      40%
      35%
      30%
      25%
      20%
      15%
      10%
       5%
       0%
                  RHUL 7 (33)      RHUL 8 (89)      RHUL 9 (66)      Professor (29)
      2022           22.7%            24.7%            21.2%             11.2%
      2023           20.1%            29.6%            21.8%             10.6%
      2024           22.9%            34.1%            22.4%             11.9%



     9. A consideration of Professional Services data shows increases across all grades apart from
        grade 8 where we see a drop from 19.3% to 17.9%. The highest increase is at grade 6 (from
        17.6% to 20.4%).


                   Figure 5c – Professional Services: change in representation of Black
                           and global majority colleagues by grade, 2022 -2024


            30%

            25%

            20%

            15%

            10%

             5%

             0%
                     RHUL 4 (20)    RHUL 5 (51)    RHUL 6 (31)    RHUL 7 (36)         RHUL 8 (26)
            2022        16.5%          22.6%         17.4%          16.1%               19.7%
            2023        25.3%          22.6%         17.6%          19.5%               19.3%
            2024        26.7%          23.6%         20.4%          19.6%               17.9%




10. There were insufficient numbers to report on representation of Black and global majority
    colleagues at grade 9 and grade 10 in Professional Services, even if the grades are aggregated.
                                                                                                    30
31



Nationality.

11. The percentage of colleagues with overseas nationality is relatively unchanged since 2022,
    following a steady decline in recent years. This includes a 0.5 percentage point increase in
    academic schools, and a 0.5 percentage point drop in Professional Services.

                Figure 6 – staff representation by nationality, 2020 - 2024

 2024

 2023

 2022

 2021

 2020

                           2020               2021     2022         2023         2024
     Overseas Nationality 26.0%              24.9%     25.3%       25.6%         25.5%
     UK Nationality       74.0%              74.4%     74.7%       74.4%         74.3%




Disability.

The proportion of colleagues declaring a disability, following a decline to 4.9% in 2023, has risen
to 5.4% in 2024, accompanied by a slight 0.2 percentage point decrease in reporting rates.
However, the figure remains below the S10 average of 9%. Notably, although still
relatively low, the non-reporting rate for disability has more than doubled since 2020.

                   Figure 7 – disabled staff representation, 2020 - 2024

          2024
          2023
          2022
          2021
          2020

                  0%    10%    20%   30%     40%     50%     60%   70%     80%    90%    100%
                        2020         2021            2022           2023            2024
     Disabled           4.1%         4.6%            4.9%           4.7%            5.4%
     Not disabled      95.4%         93.9%           93.1%         93.5%            93.0%
     Unknown            0.5%         1.5%            2.0%           1.8%            1.6%




                                                                                                   31
32



12. The increase in the proportion of disabled colleagues reflects a 1.0 percentage point increase
    in the proportion of Professional Services disabled colleagues to 6.1% , and 0.5 percentage
    point increase in the proportion of academic disabled colleagues to 4.9%.

13. As in 2023, "Long-standing illness/health condition" remains the most commonly declared
    condition, increasing from 1.4% in 2023 to 2.0% in 2024. This is followed by learning
    differences (0.9%) and mental health conditions (0.7%), both of which remain unchanged
    from the previous year.

14. Figure 8 shows changes in the representation of disabled colleague by four aggregated grade
    groups, created due to small numbers to enable reporting. The highest proportion of disabled
    colleagues were at grades 2, 3 and 4 (9.3%), and the lowest at grades 9, 10 and Professor (4.2%)
    which has remained relatively stable across all three years.
           Figure 8 – change in representation of disabled colleagues by
                                 grade, 2022 -2024

        10%
         8%
         6%
         4%
         2%
         0%
                Grades 9, 10 and    Grades 7 and 8      Grades 5 and 6     Grades 2, 3 and 4
                 Professor (618)        (734)               (434)               (107)
         2022        4.4%                5.9%                  2.9%               7.4%
         2023        4.3%                5.1%                  3.5%               8.5%
         2024        4.2%                6.4%                  4.6%               9.3%

                                       2022     2023    2024


                            *Numbers in brackets represent the number of staff as at 31 July 2024.




Sexual orientation.

15. The proportion of LGBT+ colleagues increased by 0.7 percentage points since the previous
    year and in 2024 is 7.1%. The sector average in 2023 was 6.1% (Advance HE statistical report
    covering 2022/23). The proportion of colleagues who preferred not to record their sexual
    orientation has continued to decrease year on year and is now 24.1%. This non-reporting rate
    continues to be lower than the reported sector average (34.7%, Advance HE statistical report
    covering 2022/23).




                                                                                                     32
33




          Figure 9a –staff representation by sexual orientation, 2020 - 24

 2024

 2023

 2022

 2021

 2020

                                    2020         2021        2022           2023      2024
     LGBT+                          6.2%         5.6%        6.5%           6.4%      7.1%
     Heterosexual                   62.4%       63.5%       65.7%           68.0%     68.8%
     Unknown/ Prefer not to say     31.4%       30.9%       27.8%           25.7%     24.1%




16. The proportion of LGBT+ colleagues in academic Schools and departments increased from
    8.2% to 9.0%, and the non-reporting rate fell by 2.4 percentage points to 31.3%. There was a
    0.5 percentage point increase in the proportion of LGBT+ colleagues in Professional Services
    to 4.8%, where the non-reporting rate for sexual orientation also fell from 16.2% to 15.6%.

17. Figure 9b shows representation of LGBT+ colleagues by three grade groups, aggregated to
    enable reporting. The highest increase is in grades 9, 10 and Professor from 6.3% in 2023 to
    7.4%. The lowest proportion of LGBT+ colleagues remains at grades 5 and 6 (6.2%).



               Figure 9b – change in representation of LGBT+
                      colleagues by grade, 2022 -2024
     10%
      8%
      6%
      4%
      2%
      0%
                 Grades 5 and 6        Grades 7 and 8        Grades 9, 10 and
                     (434)                 (734)              Professor (618)
        2022         5.6%                   7.5%                    5.9%
        2023         5.1%                   7.5%                    6.3%
        2024         6.20%                  7.80%                   7.40%


                    *Numbers in brackets relate to staff numbers as at 31 July 2024




                                                                                               33
34



18. The disaggregated data for sexual orientation shows that 69% of colleagues identify as
    straight, 3% identify as gay or lesbian, 3% as bisexual, and 3% fall under categories including
    ‘in another way,’ ‘prefer to self-describe,’ ‘asexual,’ or ‘queer.’ Additionally, 24% of colleagues
    chose not to disclose their sexual orientation.




             Figure 10 – disaggregated data for sexual orientation 2024
                                             3% 3%


                                    24%

                            1%


                                                  69%




        Bisexual   Gay/Lesbian     Heterosexual / Straight   Other    Prefer not to say




Age.

19. We see slight fluctuations across all age groups with no prominent patterns observed in the
    last four years. We see slight increases, both for Professional Services and for academic
    colleagues, in the 51-60 and 61+ age groups, compared to the <30, 31-40 and 41-50 where we
    see slight drops.

        Figure 11 –staff representation by age group, 2020 - 2024


 2024
 2023
 2022
 2021
 2020
               2020        2021           2022          2023         2024
     <30       12.4%       11.0%          11.4%         11.9%        11.6%
     31-40     26.5%       25.9%          25.4%         24.3%        24.0%
     41-50     26.2%       27.9%          28%           28.9%        28.1%
     51-60     23.8%       25.4%          25.0%         23.6%        24.6%
     61+       11.0%       9.8%           10.3%         11.2%        11.6%




                                                                                                    34
35



Religion and belief.

20. At 38%, the proportion of colleagues who declare a religion or belief was very similar to the
    proportion who declare no religion or belief (39%). 23% of colleagues either prefer not to say,
    or have not answered this question.

         Figure 12 –staff representation by religion or belief, 2024
                   Prefer not to
                  say/Unknown
                       23%
                                                   No religion or
                                                       belief
                                                        39%




                  Religion or belief
                         38%




21. The largest representation was of Christian colleagues (25.5%) followed by Muslim (4.0%),
    Hindu (3.0%), Spiritual (1.6%), Sikh (1.1%), Jewish (0.8%), Buddhist (0.8%) and any other
    religion or belief (1.0%).


Marital status.

22. 40.7% of colleagues have recorded that they are married, and 1.0% that they are in a Civil
    Partnership. 18.6% of colleagues have not answered this question.




Factors which influence representation.

23. The following sections of this report focus on staff turnover, recruitment and promotion, all of
    which influence representation within the university. This data indicates where changes to
    practice may help increase the diversity and representation across grades within the
    workforce.




                                                                                                 35
36



Staff turnover.


                       Figure 13 – staff turnover by characteristic, 2023-24




24. Figure 13 shows staff turnover rates within the year 2023/24 at university level, by sex,
    ethnicity, disability and sexual orientation. The overall data for academics and Professional
    Services is included for comparison, as is data from 2021/22 and 2022/23.

25. Overall, turnover has fallen since the previous year across all groups, most notably for Disabled
    colleagues (a 20.8 percentage point drop since last year), Black and global majority colleagues
    (4.4 percentage point drop), LGBT+ colleagues (4.6 percentage point drop). Female colleagues
    continue to have a higher rate of turnover than male. We have 49 female academic leavers (55
    male) and 64 female Professional Services leavers (42 male). The turnover rate for female
    colleagues in Professional Services and in academic schools and departments is comparable:
    11.4%, and 10.9% respectively.

26. In 2022/23 the turnover rate of Black and global majority colleagues was 4.5 percentage points
    higher than for White colleagues (17.6% compared to 13.1%). This year the overall rate is
    lower, and the gap has reduced slightly to 3.2 percentage points (13.2% compared to 10.0%).
    The turnover rate for LGBT+ colleagues is also higher than for heterosexual colleagues (16.9%
    compared to 12.0%) though the gap has reduced since last year from 7.1 to 4.9 percentage
    points.



                                                                                                  36
37



27. Turnover by age group in 2021/22, 2022/23 and 2023/24 is shown in figure 14. There has been
    a significant reduction in turnover rates for colleagues aged 30 and under, though this remains
    higher than colleagues in other age ranges.

        Figure 14 – Staff turnover by age group, 2022-23




Recruitment

28. The University attracts a diverse set of applications from across different protected
    characteristics. The full applicant profile is shown below in figure 15.

      Characteristic        Number of applicants % of applicants 2024       % of applicants 2023
                                  2024
         Female                   4027                  51.1%                       47.8%
          Male                      3692                   46.8%                    49.9%
     Prefer not to say               168                    2.1%                    2.3%
Black and Global Majority           4274                   54.2%                    51.7%
          White                     3285                   41.7%                    39.0%
     Prefer not to say               327                    4.1%                    9.3%
        Overseas                    3883                   49.2%                    54.2%
           UK                       4003                   50.8%                    44.8%
     Prefer not to say                1                    0.0%                     1.0%
         Disabled                    525                    6.7%                    5.1%
      Not disabled                  6995                   88.7%                    90.7%


                                                                                                37
38



     Prefer not to say                            367                             4.7%                             4.2%
          LGBT+                                   1110                           14.1%                             12.3%
      Heterosexual                                6095                           77.3%                             77.1%
     Prefer not to say                            682                             8.6%                             10. 6%


                                                                                             Figure 15 – Applicant profile 2024



29. Figure 16 shows selection decision outcomes by characteristic, with White applicants, UK
    applicants and Disabled applicants showing the highest success rate.




                    Figure 16 - Selection decision outcomes by protected characteristics, 2024

                     Not Disabled
                           Disabled
                                UK
                     International
                             White
                              BGM
                              Men
                           Women
                           Straight
                              LGBT

                                      0%      10%       20%      30%      40%      50%       60%     70%     80%      90%     100%
                                                                                               Internati               Not
                                           LGBT   Straight Women       Men      BGM      White           UK Disabled
                                                                                                 onal                Disabled
         Not Shortlisted               79.2%      81.9%    79.4%       83.5%    86.6%    74.6% 86.7% 75.5% 75.6% 82.0%
         Shortlisted but not offered 15.2%        13.2%    14.9%       12.5%    10.6%    17.4%     10.6%   17.1%   18.1%    13.3%
         Offered                           5.6%     4.8%      5.7%     4.0%     2.7%     8.0%      2.7%    7.4%     6.3%    4.8%

                                       Not Shortlisted         Shortlisted but not offered       Offered




30. Overseas applicants and Black and global majority applicants show the lowest shortlisting
    success rates. Figure 17 below shows selection outcome decisions for Overseas and UK Black
    and global majority and White colleagues to understand the impact of the intersection of
    these two characteristics. It shows differences in shortlisting and offer rates between UK
    White and UK Black and global majority applicants, and between Overseas UK and Overseas
    Black and global majority applicants, in favour of White applicants.


                                                                                                                                    38
39




                Figure 17 – Selection decision outcome Overseas and UK
                              applicants by ethnicity, 2024

                                     UK White

                  UK Black and global majority

                           International White

        International Black and global majority

                                                  0%   20%    40%      60%   80%   100%

                                     Not shortlisted    Shortlisted



31. If we consider the intersection with ‘permission to work’, we note that 6.1% of BGM
    international applicants with no permission to work were shortlisted, compared to a larger
    16.2% of international White applicants with no permission to work.

32. Figure 18a shows the profile of those to whom offers were made. Offers to Black and global
    majority, overseas applicants, disabled, LGBT+ and female applicants were higher than the
    proportion of colleagues currently employed in these groups. This suggests that recruitment
    is contributing to a diversification of the overall workforce, although at different rates.

                                      Offer profile                                                  Staff proportion
        Characteristic                                  Offer profile 2024   Staff proportion 2023
                                         2023                                                              2024

Female                                    58.5%                57.1%                 52.5%                53.2%

Male                                      39.7%                38.6%                 47.5%               46.8%

Prefer not to say                          1.5%                 4.3%                 1.5%

Black and Global Majority                 27.6%                29.6%                20.5%                 21.6%

White                                     65.0%                66.9%                 75.7%                74.7%

Prefer not to say                          7.4%                 3.5%                 3.8%                 3.6%

International applicant                  29..0%                26.3%                25.6%                 25.5%

UK applicant                              71.0%                73.7%                 74.4%                74.5%

Disabled                                   7.3%                 8.6%                 4.7%                 5.4%

Not disabled                              88.1%                84.8%                 93.5%                93.0%

Prefer not to say                          4.6%                 6.6%                 1.8%                 1.6%

LGBT+                                     10.4%                15.1%                 6.4%                 7.1%

Heterosexual                              65.4%                75.0%                 68%                 68.8%

Prefer not to say                         24.2%                 9.9%                 25.7%                24.1%



                                                                                                                   39
40



33. Disabled applicants receive better outcomes at shortlisting than non-disabled applicants but
    less so at interview stage. Black and global majority applicants receive less positive
    outcomes overall than White applicants at both shortlisting and interview.



                          Figure 18b Offers profile (by applicants, by shortlisted)
        Not Disabled
            Disabled
                   UK
        International
               White
                BGM
                Men
             Women
             Straight
                LGBT

                     0.0%          5.0%         10.0%            15.0%         20.0%          25.0%          30.0%         35.0%
                                                                                        Internatio                        Not
                            LGBT   Straight   Women      Men        BGM        White                  UK     Disabled
                                                                                            nal                         Disabled
     Offers/apps          5.40%    4.80%      5.60%     2.50%       2.70%      7.20%       2.1%       7.3%     6.5%       4.8%
     Offers/shortlisted   26.0%    26.0%      27.2%     15.20%     20.30%     28.60%     16.2%       30.1%    26.6%      26.6%

                                                Offers/apps        Offers/shortlisted




  34. Recruitment to senior posts – grades 8, 9 and Professor for Academic schools and
      departments, and 8, 9 and 10 in Professional Services – has been examined in more detail,
      aggregating the data for these grades to allow for reporting. For senior academic posts in
      relation to sex, 38.3% of applicants were female, higher than the previous year (32.8%).
      Female applicants were more successful at being shortlisted (16.2% of applicants) than
      male applicants (10.2% of applicants), and 22.7% of women shortlisted were made an
      offer, compared to 22.3% of men. We also note that 3.7% of women applicants, and 2.3%
      of men applicants were made an offer. Professional Services also has a lower proportion of
      female applicants for grades 8, 9, and 10, at 39.5%. However, women demonstrate higher
      success rates at all stages of the recruitment process. Of those who applied, 31.5% of
      women were shortlisted compared to 19.5% of men. Among those shortlisted, 29.0% of
      women received offers, while 19.7% of men were offered a position. Overall, 9.0% of
      female applicants secured roles, whereas only 3.9% of male applicants were successful.

  35. Over the past two years, applications for academic posts at grades 8, 9, and professorial
      level from Black and global majority candidates have remained high, with 60.9% in
      2023/24 and 61.8% in 2022/23, compared to 48.9% in 2021/22. However, disparities in
      shortlisting and offer rates persist. While 20.3% of White applicants were shortlisted, only
      8.4% of Black and global majority candidates progressed to this stage. Among those
      shortlisted, 26.7% of White candidates received offers, equating to 5.4% of all White
                                                                                                                            40
41



      applicants, whereas 18.8% of shortlisted Black and global majority candidates were
      offered roles, representing just 1.6% of total applicants from these groups.


36. For Professional Services posts at grades 8, 9, and 10, 40.9% of applications (272) came from
    Black and global majority candidates, while 51.3% (393) were from White applicants.
    However, success rates for Black and global majority candidates were significantly lower at
    all stages of the recruitment process. Among those shortlisted, 19.2% of Black and global
    majority candidates received offers, equating to 3.1% of total applicants from this group.
    27.2% of shortlisted White candidates were offered roles, representing 8.8% of all White
    applicants.

37. Analysis of recruitment to senior posts by sexual orientation is difficult due to small numbers.
    Data relating to posts at grade 8, 9, 10 and Professor within the university were aggregated
    to give an indication of the current position. The proportion of LGBT+ applicants was 10.4%
    (231) (higher than last year’s 8.8%), with non-reporting at 9.6% (compared to 11.1% last
    year). LGBT+ candidates were more successful at shortlisting compared to heterosexual
    candidates (16.9% compared to 15.3%), and unlike 2023, more successful at offer stage:
    25.6% of LGBT+ applicants shortlisted were made offers (4.3% of applicants) compared to
    23.9% of straight/heterosexual shortlisted applicants (3.6% of applicants).

38. Analysis of recruitment to senior posts in relation to disability is also difficult because of small
    numbers. Data in relation to disability for recruitment to all posts at grades 8, 9, 10 and
    Professor was aggregated to create a picture of the current position. It shows that
    shortlisting rates for disabled applicants (22.8%) were higher than for non-disabled
    candidates (15.1%), and disabled applicants were more successful at offer stage: 26.9% of
    disabled shortlisted applicants were made offers compared to 22.4% of non-disabled
    applicants. At the same time, 6.1% of disabled applicants, and a lower 3.4% of non-disabled
    applicants were made offers.


Academic promotion.

39 Data in relation to academic promotion was analysed in relation to sex and ethnicity,
   aggregated over 2019 – 2024 to enable reporting, with the exclusion of 2021, when the
   promotion process did not take place. Last year on reporting this data, female colleagues were
   overall more successful than male, and more successful at promotion to Reader and senior
   lecturer, with similar success rates for promotion to Professor.

40 In this year’s analysis female candidates are shown as more successful overall, and for every
   role. For promotion to Professor the proportion of female applicants (52.7%) was
   considerably higher than the average population at grade 9 (41.8%). The reverse was true in
   last year’s analysis.

41 Last year, success rates in the academic promotions process for Black and global majority
   colleagues were 1.3 percentage points lower than for White colleagues overall, and 8.2
   percentage points lower in promotion success rates to Professor roles. Looking at promotion
   to Reader and Senior Lecturer roles, we saw higher success rates for BGM applicants (60%
                                                                                                     41
42



     compared to 50% of White applicants for Reader roles, 63.3% compared to 59.7% of White
     applicants for Senior Lecturer roles).

42 This year’s analysis shows that the overall success rate gap has widened in favour of White
   applicants, increasing to 6.3 percentage points. The gap in success rates for promotion to
   Professor remains similar to last year at 8.9%. While success rates for Black and global majority
   applicants at the Reader level remain higher by 3.1 percentage points, this is a slight decrease
   from the previous year. Additionally, for Senior Lecturer positions, success rates for BGM
   candidates have now fallen below those of White candidates, at 53.8% compared to 59.2%.

43 The proportion of promotion applications from Black and global majority colleagues was
   lower than the average overall population at grades 8 and 9 in this period: 18.6% compared
   to 21.8%. (This compares to 17.5% compared to 19.9% in last year’s analysis). The proportion
   of applications to Professor from Black and global majority colleagues (22.1%) was higher
   than the average proportion at grade 9 (19.8%). The proportion of Black and global majority
   applications for promotion to both Reader and Senior Lecturer roles were lower than the
   corresponding proportion of Black and global majority colleagues at grade 8 and grade 9.


                      Figure 19 – All promotions change in success rates
         65%


         60%


         55%


         50%


         45%
                       2017-22                    2018-23                   2019-24
        All             57.5%                      54.6%                    52.6%
        Male            55.4%                      53.7%                    51.4%
        Female          60.3%                      55.7%                    56.3%
        White           59.0%                      55.1%                    54.5%
        BGM             53.0%                      53.8%                    48.2%

                         All      Male       Female         White     BGM




                                                                                                 42
43



                      Figure 20 – Professor change in success rates

      65%
      60%
      55%
      50%
      45%
      40%
      35%
                       2017-22                2018-23                 2019-24
     All                52.7%                  51.0%                   47.1%
     Male               50.0%                  51.0%                   45.6%
     Female             57.6%                  51.8%                   52.7%
     White              55.6%                  52.3%                   49.5%
     BGM                41.2%                  44.1%                   40.6%

              All          Male         Female           White        BGM




               Figure 21 – Reader change in success rates
      65%
      60%
      55%
      50%
      45%
                       2017-22                2018-23                 2019-24
     All                61.3%                  52.5%                   51.9%
     Male               61.8%                  51.0%                   46.3%
     Female             60.8%                  54.0%                   56.8%
     White              62.0%                  50.0%                   50.7%
     BGM                62.5%                  60.0%                   53.8%

              All          Male         Female           White        BGM




              Figure 22 Senior Lecturer change in success rates
       70%
       65%
       60%
       55%
       50%
       45%
                        2017-22                  2018-23                 2019-24
     All                 60.3%                   59.0%                    57.2%
     Male                53.2%                   53.9%                    56.8%
     Female              68.8%                   64.5%                    58.9%
     White               61.5%                   59.7%                    59.2%
     BGM                 60.0%                   63.3%                    53.8%

                All         Male          Female           White        BGM



                            Figure 22 – Senior Lecturer change in success rates
                                                                                   43
44



44 Figures 19, 20, 21 and 22 above show the change in success rates reported in the last three
   years from different groups. The data indicates an overall decline in success rates, with the
   biggest drop observed in promotion to Professor. The largest racial disparity is also in
   promotion to Professor, where the gap between Black and global majority and White
   applicants has widened to 8.9 percentage points in favour of White applicants, compared to
   8.2 percentage points in last year’s analysis.


Professional Services promotion and progression.

45 Upward grade changes for staff over a single year has been analysed through comparing the
   snapshot population on 31 July 2023 with that of 31 July 2024. Colleagues who left the
   University over the course of the year were removed (88), and of the remaining 744 colleagues
   it was found that 55 had progressed to a higher grade (7.4%). 61.8% were female (up from
   51.9% last year) and 38.2% male. In addition, 14.5% of the promotions were of Black and global
   majority colleagues (down from 19.8% last year) and 81.8% of White colleagues.

46 In the same year there were 120 new starters in Professional Services. Figure 23 below
   compares the number of promotions to new starters, with some grades aggregated where
   there are insufficient numbers to report. This shows that 31.4% of movements into each grade
   came from promotions (down from 34.9% last year) and 68.6% from recruitment.

                        Promotions                New Starters                   Total Changes
Grade 2, 3, 4 and 5         18                        44                               62
Grade 6                     12                        21                               33
Grade 7                     14                        22                               36
Grade 8, 9 and 10           11                        33                               44
Total                       55                       120                              175

                            Figure 23 – Staff changes in Professional Services




47 This suggests that increasing promotions and mobility in Professional Services should be
   explored, particularly where there are difficulties recruiting and retaining staff.




                                                                                                 44
45



Pay gaps.


Introduction.

48. The Equality Act 2010 (Gender Pay Gap Information) Regulations 2017 introduced an annual
    duty on all employers with more than 250 staff to publish information relating to the gender
    pay gap: the difference between the average hourly pay of male and female colleagues within
    the workforce. Information is required each year as of a snapshot date of 31 March.
    Employers are also required to show the gender distribution for the workforce, divided into
    four pay quartiles.

49. The gender pay gap is a different measure to ’equal pay’ which refers to male and female
    colleagues in the same employment doing the same work receiving the same pay. The gender
    pay gap highlights the gender distribution in different roles at the University. Royal Holloway
    is committed to equality, diversity and inclusion, and to becoming an anti-racist university.
    Although not a mandatory requirement, we also report our ethnicity and disability pay gaps,
    based on the same data and methodology as calculating the gender pay gaps.

50. For the purposes of mandatory reporting, these calculations include the whole workforce
    including those on hourly paid contracts. Figure 24 below shows the staff numbers involved
    for each group. Staff who prefer not to say have not been included within the calculations.

                                              2022                  2023                  2024

         Female                               1681                  1701                  1795
         Male                                  1308                 1325                  1308
         Black and global                      670                   726                   763
         majority
         White                                2196                  2193                  2231
         Disabled                              187                   171                   176
         Non-disabled                          2738                 2803                  2847

                 Figure 24 –staff numbers in pay gap reports, as at 31 March in 2022, 2023 and 2024


51. The mean pay rate (or average) is calculated by adding up the hourly rates of all colleagues
    and dividing the figure by the number of colleagues. The mean pay gap is the percentage
    difference between the mean pay of different groups of colleagues, for example female and
    male.

52. The median pay gap (or midpoint) is the figure that falls in the middle of a range, so if all the
    hourly rates of every individual are lined up from smallest to largest, the median pay is the
    one that falls in the middle. The median pay gap is the difference between the median
    hourly pay of different groups of colleagues, for example female and male.

                                                                                                      45
46



Gender pay gaps.

53. Figure 25 below shows the gender pay gaps as at 31 March 2024, and the change in these
    gaps since March 2020.

                                            2020        2021          2022          2023          2024
                                             (%)         (%)           (%)           (%)           (%)
         Gender pay gap mean pay
                                             18.5       19.3          17.6          15.2           17.9
         rate
         Gender pay gap median
                                             17.5       18.6          15.4          14.7           19.1
         pay rate
                                                                       Figure 25 –gender pay gaps, 2020 - 2024

54. In 2024 the mean gender pay gap rose by 2.7 percentage points since the previous year and
    the median by 4.4 percentage points. The reasons for this change are explained below
    (points 56 to 58). The gender pay gaps had fallen consistently over the previous five years
    with the exception of in 2021, where a small rise was caused by a decrease in the size of the
    casual workforce, and an increase in the proportion of women both in casual roles and in
    grades 2-5.

Gender representation

55. Figure 26 shows the representation of
    male and female staff within four pay            Upper Quartile
    quartiles. It demonstrates that for
                                                      Upper Middle
    Royal Holloway, there is a higher
    proportion of males in higher paid roles          Lower Middle
    than females, and a higher proportion            Lower Quartile
    of females in lower paid roles than
                                                                      0%     20%      40%       60%       80%    100%
    males. It is this imbalance that
    produces the gender pay gap.                                   Lower           Lower       Upper         Upper
                                                                  Quartile         Middle      Middle       Quartile
                                                        Female     72.0%           59.7%       57.7%         41.9%
56. The overall gender distribution in
                                                     Male       28.0%        40.3%       42.3%         58.1%
    March 2024 was 57.8% female and
    42.2% male. This represents a 1.6                                      Female    Male
    percentage point increase in the
    proportion of female colleagues. This        Figure 26 – gender distribution by pay quartile, 31 March 2024
    change is most evident in the lower
    quartile, where the proportion of
    female colleagues has increased from 66.4% in 2023 to 72% in 2024: the biggest change in a
    pay quartile seen in our statistics since pay gap reporting began in 2017.

57. Representation of female colleagues in the upper pay quartile increased by 0.1 percentage
    points in 2024. The upper quartile holds 34.4% of all male colleagues and only 18.1% of all
    female colleagues. The significant increase in the proportion of female colleagues in the


                                                                                                                  46
47



     lower pay quartile, which is not reflected by a similar increase in the upper pay quartile, is the
     reason why the gender pay gaps have increased this year.

58. The lower quartile includes 71% of colleagues who are employed on a casual contract. Many
    of these are students. The size and distribution of the casual workforce fluctuates each year,
    and this can have a significant impact on gender pay gaps – as it has for Royal Holloway this
    year. This year, the number of female colleagues on a casual contract grew by 15%, while the
    number of male colleagues on a similar contract fell by 19%. This has driven the increase in
    the gender pay gap across the whole University, which as shown above (point 54) goes
    against the trend from the last five years.

59. It is noticeable that the gender distribution in the two middle quartiles is much more
    balanced in line with the overall distribution of female colleagues of 57.8%. The proportion
    of female colleagues in the upper middle quartile is only 0.1 percentage point lower than the
    overall distribution, and in the lower middle quartile only 1.9 percentage points higher. What
    happens in the lower and upper quartile is the most significant influence on the pay gaps.


     80%
     70%
     60%
     50%
     40%
     30%
     20%
     10%
      0%
               Lower Quartile         Lower Middle            Upper Middle             Upper Quartile
      2020          64.0%                 58.1%                   53.5%                     39.8%
      2021          67.9%                 60.6%                   52.9%                     40.0%
      2022          67.6%                 59.3%                   56.9%                     41.1%
      2023          66.4%                 59.5%                   57.1%                     41.8%
      2024           72%                  59.7%                   57.7%                     41.9%

                                                  Figure 27– Female distribution by pay quartile, 2020 - 2024



60. Figure 27 shows how the representation of female colleagues has changed across the last five
    years of gender pay gap reporting. There has been slow but consistent growth in the number
    of female colleagues in the upper pay quartile, which in 2024 was 41.9%. This is
    accompanied by bigger rise over time in the proportion of female colleagues in the upper
    middle pay quartile. The proportion of women in the lower middle pay quartile has changed
    little in the last five years, and in the lower quartile we see bigger fluctuations. For the
    gender pay gap to decrease, the distribution of female colleagues across all four pay quartile
                                                                                                            47
48



      needs to be more even and reflective of the overall representation of female colleagues at
      57.8%.

Gender bonus gap.

61. Analysis of gender bonus gaps indicates that the mean gap was 7.7% in 2024, whilst the
    median was 0%. A greater proportion of female colleagues received a bonus (1.7%)
    compared to male colleagues (0.8%). Bonuses are small in number and as a result, gaps
    fluctuate significantly each year.


                                          2020     2021          2022         2023          2024
                                           (%)     (%)            (%)          (%)           (%)
             Mean Gender Bonus            2.6       4.5          35.3         -25.3%         7.7%
             Gap
             Median Gender Bonus          15.7      0.0          0.0           0.0%         0.0%
             Gap

                                                   Figure 28 – gender bonus gaps 2020 - 2024




                                   2020           2021            2022              2023            2024
                                    (%)            (%)             (%)               (%)             (%)
       Male employees               1.5           5.9              2.8               1.2              0.8
       receiving a bonus                                                           (n=16)           (n=11)
       Female employees             1.8           3.9              3.5               2.3              1.7
       receiving a bonus                                                           (n=39)           (n=30)

                                                          Figure 29 –bonus distribution by gender, 2020 – 2024

Ethnicity pay gap.

62. Figure 30 shows that in 2024, the mean ethnicity pay gap was 12.9%, a rise of 0.1 percentage
    points since 2023. The median pay gap was 6.2%, a fall of 5.2 percentage points since 2023.
    Ethnicity bonus gaps are not shown due to low numbers.

                                           2021           2022                  2023                2024
                                            (%)            (%)                   (%)                 (%)
     Ethnicity pay gap mean pay rate       12.6           12.2                  12.8                 12.9

     Ethnicity pay gap median pay rate     12.1           15.0                  11.4                 6.2

                                                                        Figure 30–ethnicity pay gaps, 2021 - 2024


                                                                                                               48
49



Ethnicity representation.

63. Figure 31 shows the                       Upper Quartile
    representation of White
    and Black and global                        Upper Middle
    majority colleagues
    within four pay                             Lower Middle
    quartiles, giving
    indications as to why                     Lower Quartile
    we have pay gaps and
    why they have changed                                      0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90%100%
    between 2023 and
                                                                    Lower      Lower       Upper         Upper
    2024.                                                          Quartile    Middle      Middle       Quartile
                                        Black & global majority     33.2%      23.70%      27.1%         17.9%
64. The overall ethnicity          White                 66.8%       76.3%         72.9%       82.1%
    distribution is 74.5%
    White (down from
    75.1% in 2023) and 25.5% Black                Figure 31 –pay quartile distribution by ethnicity, 2024
    and global majority (up from
    24.9%). This increase in Black and global majority representation is particularly reflected in
    the upper middle quartile.

65. The upper quartile holds 27.5% of all White colleagues and only 17.6% of all Black and global
    majority colleagues. By contrast the lower quartile holds 22.4% of all White colleagues and
    32.6% of all Black and global majority colleagues. This is a key factor in Royal Holloway’s
    ethnicity pay gaps.

                 90%
                 80%
                 70%
                 60%
                 50%
                 40%
                 30%
                 20%
                 10%
                  0%
                         Lower quartile      Lower middle         Upper middle    Upper quartile
                  2021        27.4%              18.9%               19.2%              14.9%
                  2022        32.2%              20.0%               22.2%              19.1%
                  2023        33.4%              22.1%               25.3%              18.7%
                  2024        33.2%              23.7%               27.1%              17.9%


                 Figure 32 – Black & global majority colleagues pay quartile distribution 2021 - 2024



                                                                                                                   49
50



66. Since 2021 there has been an increase in the number of Black and global majority colleagues
    in all pay quartiles, but there has been a small decrease this year in the lower quartile and a
    slightly bigger decrease in the upper quartile. The small decrease in the proportion of Black
    and global majority colleagues in the lower pay quartile is likely to have caused the decrease
    in the median pay gap in 2024. The small decrease in the proportion of Black and global
    majority colleagues in the upper pay quartile is likely to be a factor in the very small increase
    in the mean pay gap.


Disability pay gaps.


                                              2021                2022               2023                2024
                                               (%)                 (%)                (%)                 (%)

 Mean disability pay gap                        8.5                10.0               5.3                3.8%

 Median disability pay gap                     17.5                9.9                0.9                 0%


                                                                            Figure 33 – disability pay gaps, 2021-24


67. In 2024, the mean disability pay gap was 3.8%, a decrease of 1.5 percentage points since
    2023. Having been 0.9% in 2023, the median disability pay gap fell to zero. Disability bonus
    gaps are not shown due to low numbers.

Disability representation.


68. Figure 34 shows the
                                          Upper Quartile
    distribution of disabled and
    non-disabled staff in 2024,
    giving indications as to why           Upper Middle

    both pay gaps have decreased.
    The overall disability                 Lower Middle
    distribution is 94.2% not
    disabled and 5.8% disabled.           Lower Quartile
    The upper quartile holds 25.3%
    of all non-disabled colleagues                       0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%
    and 19.3% of all disabled
                                                          Lower Quartile   Lower Middle     Upper Middle Upper Quartile
    colleagues. The lower quartile          Disabled          6.0%             6.0%              6.9%            4.5%
    holds 25% of all non-disabled           Not Disabled     94.0%             94.0%            93.1%            95.5%
    colleagues and 25.6% of all
    disabled colleagues. This is
    the most even distribution of
                                                                       Figure 34 – quartile distribution by disability, 2024
    the three pay gap categories (gender,
    ethnicity, disability) and this is why the
    pay gaps are significantly lower.
                                                                                                                   50
51



69. Figure 35 shows how the               50%
    distribution of disabled
    colleagues across the four            40%
    pay quartiles has changed
    since 2021. The                       30%
    representation of disabled
    colleagues overall is 5.8%,           20%
    and this data shows a settling
    of the representation in the          10%
    lower and lower middle
    quartile close to this figure.         0%
                                                 Lower quartile Lower middle Upper middle Upper quartile
    This is what is driving in
                                           2021       8.1%             5.1%              3.6%             4.2%
    particular the fall to zero of
                                           2022       8.1%             6.4%              6.4%             4.7%
    the median pay gap.
                                           2023       6.0%             5.9%              6.3%             4.7%
    Balanced with an increase in
                                           2024       6.0%             6.0%              6.9%             4.5%
    the upper middle pay quartile
    this is also having an impact
    on the mean pay gap.                        Figure 35 –pay quartile distribution of colleagues with a disability,
    Representation in the upper pay                                                                     2021 - 2024
    quartile remains fairly consistent in
    the last four years – there has been no repeat of the 0.5 percentage point increase seen in
    2022.




                                                                                                              51
52



Appendix 3 Review of KPIs (Colleagues)
   Aim 1: Achieve diversity in our staff and student       2021-22 (benchmark)       2022-23             2023-24
   body
1. Increase the proportion of disabled staff to 8%           4.7% academics      4.3% academics      4.3% academics
   academics, 10% for Professional Services.
                                                            5.2% Professional    5.1% Professional   8.5% Professional
                                                                Services             Services            Services
2. Increase the proportion of Black and global majority
                                                                 19.2%                20.8%               22.5%
   academic staff to 24% (stretch to 27%).
   Aim 2: Establish an equitable and fair environment      2021-22 (benchmark)       2022-23             2023-24

3. Increase the proportion of Black and Global Majority
                                                                 11.2%                10.6%               11.9%
   Professors to 15% (stretch to 18%).
4. Increase the proportion of Women Professors to 43%
                                                                 32.7%                33.3%               33.2%
   (stretch to 48%) and Women Readers.
5. Increase the proportion of Black and global majority
   Professional Services staff at Grade 9 and 10 to 20%           9.6%                 8.5%               11.3%
   (stretch to 25%).
6. Increase proportion of Disabled Professional Services
                                                                  3.8%                 5.1%                5.1%
   staff at grade 9 and 10 to 5%.

     Aim 3: Ensure everyone is included and feels a        2021-22 (benchmark)       2022-23             2022-23
     sense of belonging
  7. Year-on-year increase in positive responses to
     culture change and sense of belonging in annual
     university Culture survey.
  8. Decrease in turnover for disabled staff.                     20.5%               32.2%
                                                                                                          11.4%
                                                               (18 leavers)        (29 leavers)



                                                                                                                         52
