
Policy for Alleged Misconduct in Research and Knowledge Exchange
This document is an accessible-format rendering of the Policy for Alleged Misconduct in Research and Knowledge Exchange maintained in the University’s intranet Policy Centre.

Responsible for this policy
Academic Registrar and Pro-Vice-Chancellor (Research and Knowledge Exchange).
People who need to read this policy
Staff and Postgraduate Research Students. 
Relevant to Academic Partnerships?
Yes. 
Date the policy was introduced
June 2015. 
Date(s) when the policy was modified
March 2024. 
Next review date
September 2026. 
Date policy approved
June 2024.
Responsible for reviewing this document
Doctoral Academy, Student Governance, and the University Research and Knowledge Exchange Committee.

Relevant documents
UK Research Integrity Office Code of Practice for Research
The Concordat to Support Research Integrity 

Related policies and documents
LJMU Whistleblowing Policy.
LJMU Staff and Student Disciplinary Procedure.
Code of Practice for Research and Knowledge Exchange.
Staff Code of Conduct.
Staff Disciplinary Procedure.
Contents
Responsible for this policy1
People who need to read this policy1
Relevant to Academic Partnerships?1
Date the policy was introduced1
Date(s) when the policy was modified1
Next review date1
Date policy approved1
Responsible for reviewing this document1
Relevant documents1
Related policies and documents1
Contents2
Name of Policy3
Section heading3
Section heading3
Section sub-heading3
Section sub-heading3
Section heading3
Appendix 13
Section heading3


Policy for Alleged Misconduct in Research and Knowledge Exchange
This document is an accessible-format rendering of the Policy for Alleged Misconduct in Research and Knowledge Exchange maintained in the University’s intranet Policy Centre.
Introduction
1.1. Liverpool John Moores University expects the highest standards of integrity to be observed by staff and students in the conducting of research and knowledge activity.
1.2. This policy with its associated procedures applies to all staff, postgraduate research students (MPhil, PhD, DBA, EdD, and Professional Doctorates), visiting staff and students and others who are or have undertaken research and knowledge exchange activity on behalf of the University or on University premises. It is approved by the Academic Board of the University and reflects the principles of the UK Research Integrity Office. 
1.3. The Academic Registrar and Pro Vice-Chancellor (Research and Knowledge Exchange) maintains overall responsibility for the policy and its procedures.
1.4. The University defines research and knowledge exchange misconduct as fabrication, falsification, plagiarism, or deception in proposing, carrying out or reporting results of research and deliberate, dangerous or negligent deviations from accepted practice in carrying out research or knowledge exchange activity. It includes failure to follow established protocols if this failure results in unreasonable risk or harm to humans, other vertebrates or the environment, failure to adhere to approved ethical practices where applicable, and facilitating of misconduct in research and knowledge exchange by collusion in, or concealment of, such actions by others. Misconduct in research and knowledge exchange will not normally include honest and reasonable error, or honest and reasonable differences of interpretation or judgement in the collection, evaluation or reporting of research results. For further information please refer to the Code of Practice for Research and Knowledge Exchange.
1.5. Although allegations of research and knowledge exchange misconduct are rare, the University aims to ensure that any allegations or discoveries of potential misconduct are taken seriously, and subject to a timely and thorough investigation, which is fair to all parties, and reported on as detailed in this Policy. The University is also committed to protecting its staff and students and will take action against individual(s) responsible for malicious or vexatious allegations.
1.6. Where allegations are made by an individual or body external to the University, such individual or body must comply with the University’s procedures.
1.7. The University reserves the right to inform relevant third-party bodies - such as a partner organisation, a regulatory or funding council, or a professional organisation, of research and knowledge exchange misconduct as appropriate.
Principles
2.1. All allegations of research and knowledge exchange misconduct are taken seriously, and complainants will not be victimised for raising genuine concerns. Where appropriate, allegations may be considered in accordance with the University’s Whistleblowing Policy.
2.2. Complainants who make vexatious allegations may be subject to disciplinary action under the Staff or Student Disciplinary Procedures.
2.3. The Investigation of Misconduct in Research and Knowledge Exchange operates on the principles of Natural Justice:
There are two or more sides to every allegation.
All parties are given the opportunity to provide evidence to substantiate their claims or version of events.
In the event of a formal investigation, full disclosure of allegations and evidence will be made to all parties.
All parties have the right to be accompanied by a companion at each stage of the procedure. For staff, this may be either a Trade Union representative or another employee of the University; students may wish to have a friend or representative from JMSU as their companion. (See: Definition of a Friend in Student Governance Procedures.)
2.4. The complainant and respondent will be informed of the agreed investigatory procedure at the commencement of formal proceedings and each party will be informed of his/her rights and responsibilities under the procedure.
2.5. Anonymous allegations will not normally be accepted. By exception, anonymous allegations of misconduct in research and knowledge exchange may be considered by the Pro-Vice Chancellor for Research and Knowledge Exchange, with support of other staff as appropriate, considering the seriousness and credibility of the concern as well as the likelihood of confirming the allegation from attributable sources.
2.6. All parties must maintain confidentiality while the assessment/investigation is in process.
Procedure
3.1. Suspected or alleged research and knowledge exchange misconduct should be notified to: Academic Registrar or the Pro-Vice Chancellor for Research and Knowledge Exchange, Liverpool John Moores University, 10 Copperas Hill, Liverpool, L3 5AH. 
3.2. Complainant(s) must submit a formal allegation in writing with appropriate supporting evidence to the Academic Registrar or the Pro-vice Chancellor for Research and Knowledge Exchange. The allegation(s) and supporting evidence will be considered in the first instance by the Academic Registrar or the Pro-vice Chancellor for Research and Knowledge Exchange to determine if a prima facie case exists. The Academic Registrar and/or Pro-vice Chancellor may seek independent advice from individuals with relevant expertise and with no material connection with the case, to determine if a prima facie case exists. Allegations can be made through the email accounts StudentGovernance@LJMU.ac.uk and ResearchIntegrity@LJMU.ac.uk. 
3.3. If it is determined that the allegation(s) do not meet the University’s definition of research and knowledge exchange misconduct or there is no prima facie evidence to support further investigation then the matter will be dismissed or where relevant, referred to other internal procedures.  
3.4. If it is determined that the allegation is vexatious or malicious, then the Academic Registrar or the Pro-Vice Chancellor for Research and Knowledge Exchange will make recommendations for further action. 
3.5. If it is determined that the allegation falls within the University’s definition of research and knowledge exchange misconduct and there is prima facie evidence to support further investigation, then the matter will be progressed in one of the following ways: 
All allegations of plagiarism, falsification of data, research commissioned or purchase from a third party, the use of artificial intelligence to gain unfair advantage, cheating or unauthorized collusion against a postgraduate research student will be referred for consideration by an Academic Misconduct Panel. 
Where an allegation of research and knowledge exchange misconduct is made against a member of staff Academic Registrar, or the Pro-vice Chancellor for Research and Knowledge Exchange will liaise with Human Resources to appoint an independent Investigating Officer to investigate the circumstances of the allegation(s). 
The Protocol for Investigating Officers is available here. 
3.6. Where an Academic Misconduct Panel is appointed at least one member of the Panel shall be a member of staff with appropriate experience of research and / or supervision / examination of research degrees as appropriate. 
3.7. The following will be notified that an Academic Misconduct Panel / Investigation / Hearing is being progressed: 
the individual(s) against whom the allegation is made, 
the Director of School or Faculty PVC, as appropriate, of the individual(s) and, in the case of postgraduate research students, the members of their supervisory team.
3.8. At the time of informing the individual(s) the Academic Registrar or the Pro-Vice Chancellor for Research and Knowledge Exchange or nominee will ensure that all relevant materials are secured. The respondent(s) may request access to such materials where this is necessary to support the response to the allegation(s). Any such requests must be approved by the Academic Registrar or the Pro-Vice Chancellor for Research and Knowledge Exchange or their nominee. 
3.9. Where the individual against whom the allegation is made is employed by the University or is enrolled as a student, the Academic Registrar or the Pro-vice Chancellor for Research and Knowledge Exchange will ensure that any contractual obligations to funding bodies, partner institutions etc. are fulfilled such as informing them of the allegations. 
3.10. After due deliberation the Academic Misconduct Panel / Investigating Officer will determine whether the allegations are dismissed, upheld in part or in full and make recommendations for appropriate action. At this point, the notification of outcome will be made to all parties involved. Where allegations are upheld in part or in full, possible corrective requirements may include the following, but this list is not exhaustive: 
Retraction / correction of articles in journals
Withdrawal / repayment of funding
Notifying research participants of any issues that may arises
Notification misconduct to regulatory bodies or professional bodies
Notifying other employing organisations involved in the research
Review of internal management and / or training and / or supervisory procedures for research
Recommendation of expulsion from the university with or without an alternative exit award
Referral to other appropriate procedures as dictated by the circumstances of the case, e.g., the staff or student disciplinary procedures
Revocation of award.
3.11. Where evidence of malpractice (illegal or negligent behaviour) or malicious intent (deliberate misconduct) is found the case will be referred for consideration under the University’s Staff Disciplinary Policy. 
3.12. Where the case is proven against a postgraduate research student who has submitted a thesis and is in the process of examination, the Academic Misconduct Panel will consider whether or not the examination will process will cease (in the most serious of cases, be deemed to have failed and/or expelled from the University) or proceed with the student being permitted a further opportunity for assessment following revision of any submitted thesis..
3.13. The individual against whom the allegation was made will be formally notified of the outcome. The outcome of proven cases of research misconduct against a postgraduate research student will also be reported to the University’s Research Degrees Committee.
3.14. Where there is a recommendation to expel a postgraduate research student from the University this will be referred for consideration to the Vice-Chancellor (or nominee) via the Student Governance Office
3.15. The decision of the Vice-Chancellor will be notified to the Academic Misconduct Panel and to the student via the Student Governance Office. Students will be advised about the appropriate appeals procedures by Student Governance.
3.16. When a postgraduate student is also a member of LJMU staff, the matter will be referred to HR to determine whether there is any further action such as staff disciplinary procedures.
Appeals
4.1. An individual, against whom action has been taken as a result of this procedure, shall have the right of appeal. 
4.2. For members of staff any appeal will be to Human Resources within 10 days of the decision. Please see stage 3 of the staff disciplinary procedure for more information regarding the process. For postgraduate research students the right of appeal shall be through the Chair of the University’s Research Degrees Committee as detailed in the University Research Degrees Framework. Appeals must be lodged within 10 days from the date of notification of the outcome decision. 
The Appeals form is available here.
The Appeals Guidance Notes document is available here.
There is a separate Appeal against Expulsion Procedure and students will be advised of this procedure. Documentation is available here.
Data Protection
The line manager, investigating officer and note taker, will make a written or electronic record of all meetings under this procedure. The University processes any personal data collected during this process in accordance with its data protection policy. Any data collected is held securely and accessed by, and disclosed to, individuals only to complete this process. Inappropriate access or disclosure of employee data constitutes a data breach and should be reported in accordance with the University's data protection policy immediately. It may also constitute a disciplinary offence, which will be dealt with under the University's disciplinary procedure. Please consult the Universities Data Privacy statement for more information. 
Employers can be subject to significant fines under the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) for failure to follow the data protection principles and data breach requirements. Organisations may also be subject to direct claims for compensation by individuals who have suffered damage because of a breach of the GDPR. 
Monitoring and Review
The policy will be reviewed every three years or:
When major statutory change takes place, or 
When the procedures are drawn into question in a particular case.

END OF POLICY DOCUMENT
