Theory and legitimacy in professional education: A Practitioner Review of
Reflective Processes within Programmes for New Academic Staff


Peter Kahna, Richard Youngb, Sue Gracec, Ruth Pilkingtond, Linda Rushe, Bland
Tomkinsonf and Ian Willisa
a
 The University of Liverpool, UK; bNewcastle University, UK; cThe University of York,
UK; dUniversity of Central Lancashire, UK; eEdge Hill University, UK; fThe University
of Manchester

International Journal for Academic Development, 13(3),161-73

        Abstract

        We review research literature on coherent theoretically-based approaches to the
        use of reflective processes within programmes of initial professional education
        for new academic staff. Employing a novel methodology that incorporates
        practitioner perspectives, we establish a framework that highlights the role of
        personal and social factors, and also pedagogic and theoretical considerations, in
        shaping reflective processes. The included studies identified participants who
        had engaged in certain categories of reflection. Certain fundamental outcomes,
        however, such as changes in professional commitment, were never seen across
        an entire cohort. We thus discuss the intended learning outcomes that
        programmes might legitimately seek to meet.


Introduction

The notions of ‘reflective practice’ and ‘reflective learning’ are now widely employed
across higher education, Dewey (1933, p9), for instance, takes reflective practice to
mean the extended consideration of aspects of practice in light of its supporting grounds
and the further conclusions to which it tends. Schön (1983), meanwhile, applied this
notion of reflective practice to professional education, and in recent years we have seen
the wider use of reflective processes to support student learning more generally, as with
Boud and Walker (1990) and Moon (2000). The initial professional education that new
members of academic staff receive in relation to the application of reflective processes
to their own learning and practice is thus influential in shaping student learning across
higher education.
    Existing reviews on the use of reflective processes in programmes for new academic
staff have reported inconclusive results. The review by Prebble et al (2004, p9) found
no evidence that university teaching staff who had taken a programme that incorporated
training in reflective practice were able to make decisions on the basis of reflection as
opposed to convention, even if some programmes resulted in promising outcomes.
Gilbert and Gibbs (1998) concluded similarly, noting that the conceptual frameworks in
accounts of these programmes were usually implicit. Studies have also identified issues
with the role that reflective practice plays within these programmes. Fanghanel (2004)


 Centre for Lifelong Learning, University of Liverpool, 128 Mount Pleasant, Liverpool L69 3GW.
Email: Peter.Kahn@liverpool.ac.uk
identified a range of dissonances within three specific programmes, related to practice,
epistemology, structure and ideology, with reflection essentially used as a metaphor for
problematising professional practice. Clegg et al (2002) argues that the language of
reflective practice has been employed as a strategic approach for accreditation, while
Edwards and Nicoll (2006) point out that the rhetoric of reflective practice may serve to
mobilize professional identity and to motivate participants towards particular forms of
professional development.
    One key issue in these various studies concerns the underlying notion of reflection,
which Kreber (2004) identifies as one that is poorly conceptualized. Indeed, it is evident
that theorists typically see the need to qualify the usage of the term with further
distinctions as Moon (2000, pp18-19) observes. It is thus not surprising that previous
studies have found inconclusive evidence as to the effectiveness of programmes for new
academic staff that promote ‘reflective practice’. We highlight this point by looking at
the study by Ho (2000), which focuses on conceptual change. It can be argued that the
intervention reported in this study required participants on the programme to engage in
intensive reflection in relation to the supporting grounds for their practice, but typically
conceptual change is located under a different category to ‘reflective practice’, as with
Gilbert and Gibbs (1998). Kreber emphasizes that it is essential to both identify the
definition of reflection underpinning a study and to consider how the respective findings
can be linked, when seeking to judge the contribution of a body of studies in this area.
    Scope thus remains to gain insight into the use of reflective processes within
programmes for new academic staff, allowing us to shape practice in an informed
fashion. We report here on a review of the research literature on the characteristics of
coherent theoretically-based approaches to the use of reflective processes on
programmes of initial professional development for new members of academic staff (for
the full review report see Kahn et al, 2006). The review was one of a series of literature
reviews commissioned by the Higher Education Academy to take place between
October 2005 and May 2006, with those acting as reviewers recruited by the Project
Director from amongst colleagues within a network of programme leaders based in both
pre-1992 and post-1992 universities in the north of England.

An Interpretive-practitioner Methodology

The use of practitioners in undertaking a review of research literature provides a clear
context for the methodology, locating it within the tradition of practitioner research. It is
evident, however, that this tradition has yet significantly to engage with reviews of
research. The user review (see Burton, 2004) remains a notable exception, although user
reviews are not themselves seen as research. Rather, they are based on an earlier
academic review of the literature, as evident in Rickinson et al (2004). Many
established review methodologies, meanwhile, adopt objective stances towards research
literature that may sit uneasily with practitioners (as for instance with systematic
reviews, Cooper and Hedges, 1994, and realist reviews, Pawson, 2002), favouring as
they do transparent and technical approaches.
    We thus developed a novel interpretive-practitioner methodology for the review, one
that may broadly be classed as a narrative review. Our claim to novelty lies particularly
in maintaining a balance between contributions from the research literature and
practitioner perspectives; with both extracted data and practitioner commentary
incorporated into our narrative synthesis. The methodology employed for the review
itself may be divided into four phases: selection of studies for inclusion within the
review, extraction of data from the included studies along with associated practitioner
commentary, analysis of the data (including the creation of a theoretical sub-sample of
studies on which to base the main conclusions) and finally the narrative report.
    The review incorporated a study on the current state of practice within programmes
within England. This involved a review of grey literature, covering programme
handbooks and other documentation from a sample of 15 English higher education
institutions. This further permits us to highlight within the synthesis issues relevant to
external validity. The institutions covered included a number from the network of
programme leaders from which the review team was drawn. While such a documentary
analysis provides a relatively limited view of any one programme, and cannot be taken
as representative of the population of programmes, it does allow us to focus directly on
the language employed within the programme.
    Given the novelty of this methodology, considerations of internal and external
validity are important, as more fully analysed in Kahn et al (2007), but the validity of
our methodology will also be seen by the extent to which the review itself is useful to
practitioners and researchers. In overall terms this approach fits well with our central
research question, which concerns ascertaining the characteristics of coherent
theoretically-informed approaches to the use of reflective processes within programmes
for new academic staff, with the perspectives of practitioner researchers shaping the
way that this question is to be answered.
    The initial phase of identifying relevant literature was designed to allow freedom for
the practitioner reviewers to select studies that they considered of relevance to their own
practice, a freedom tempered by the need for construct validity in relation to the central
notion of a reflective process applied to professional practice and learning. Five
members of the review team each took a specific area of the published literature to
review: purposes and outcomes for reflection; reflective processes that involve personal
reflection; reflective processes that involve a social dimension; assessment; the
pedagogy of reflective processes. This ensured that the overarching concept of reflective
process was approached at a detailed level, so that studies operating with an implicit
understanding of reflective practice were less likely to be included within the review.
These areas provided the basis for the key words used to search standard databases such
as the British Education Index. Relevant studies were also located through
recommendations from colleagues, hand searching relevant journals, and studies
identified within earlier reviews. The areas themselves were established through
exchanges with a consultant, and left scope also for the inclusion of relevant studies
from related professional domains. Such wider inclusion of literature was important
given the limited number of studies of direct relevance to programmes for new
academic staff.
    Following standard reviewing practice, data extraction from the studies was based on
a proforma: the fields included the abstract from each study, as well as those detailing
the nature of the intervention, its context and theoretical basis. Fields further included
commentary on insights for practice, policy and learning on the part of the practitioner
reviewer. This ensured that studies from related fields were specifically interpreted with
relevance to programmes for new academic staff in mind. Analysis of extracted data
was then based on specific techniques drawn from grounded theory (Glaser, 1998; see
also Weed, 2005 for the application of grounded theory to reviewing). In particular, we
employed the method of constant comparison, searching across the proforma data for
common ideas, issues and categories. This resulted in the creation of a nested set of
categories, based on a tree structure. This framework of categories further provided a
theoretical basis for selecting a sub-sample of studies, ensuring conceptual sensitivity
specifically in line with the characteristics of the framework.
    We thus present in this paper a narrative that articulates this framework and analyses
the theoretical basis and the reported outcomes of the sub-sample of studies. Quality of
study is thus assessed in theoretical terms, rather than through such factors as robustness
of methodology or effect size (as for Slavin, 1986); although we are more cautious here
than in the main report (Kahn et al, 2006) about the extent to which conclusions can be
drawn in relation to the effectiveness of the interventions reported. The approach taken
in this paper sits more naturally with an interpretive practitioner review, focusing as it
does on the development of understanding, while also allowing connections to be made
with practice.

Characteristics of Approaches to Reflective Processes

Sixty-eight studies were formally included within the review, with 12 focusing
specifically on programmes for new academic staff, 18 covering the development of
academics more widely, 20 within initial teacher training, ten within medical or health
related practice and eight from other contexts. The studies came from 25 journals, with
Reflective Practice contributing 18 and International Journal for Academic
Development nine; and they were carried out within a range of countries, with the UK,
Australia and the US contributing the greatest numbers.
    This sample as a whole served two main purposes: to generate a framework for
understanding and to allow for the creation of a sub-sample of directly relevant studies.
While we will explore the framework in greater detail in a subsequent paper, it is
important here to provide an outline given its centrality to the review methodology. The
method of constant comparison yielded 6 major categories with which to code the data
as indicated in Table 1, with some 123 nested sub-categories articulated in total, leading
to 634 identifications against these categories across the proforma data. These
categories cover analysis of the interventions as well as actual descriptions of
programmes.


Major category                                           Description
Core reflective     Task – an extended activity or set of activities (e.g. peer observation; portfolio
process (task and   development; action research; projects; action learning; co-observation; with
focus)              specific features (e.g. a cycle of activities; progression evident in the level of
                    challenge).
                    Focus – The aspect of, or foundations for, practice investigated during the task,
                    typically viewed through one or more theories (e.g. individual practice;
                    collaborative practice; specific bases for practice; the reflective process itself).

Social basis        The social interactions between participants, facilitators and others, which may
                    help sustain the core reflective process (e.g. dialogue, including such aspects as
                    challenges, prompts, crossing of boundaries, insights from literature, specialist
                    language and feedback; roles; atmosphere).
Personal basis      Factors influencing how an individual engages in a reflective process (e.g.
                    experience; ownership; personal and professional identity; roles).
Wider context       Factors concerning the context within which the reflective process unfolds (e.g.
                    programme; workplace setting; discipline; institution).
Theoretical basis   The theoretical foundations for the reflective process (e.g. theories of practice;
                    theories of reflection; theories of professional learning)
Outcomes            Outcomes resulting from following a reflective process (e.g. change in practice;
                 development of expertise; ability to engage in reflective processes).


       Table 1: The elements of a directed reflective process as applied to practice,
       along with examples of sub-categories (and, where relevant, sub-sub-
       categories)

    It is evident from Table 1 that the framework, while focusing on the reflective
process, also addresses issues from professional learning. The social basis for a
reflective process, where the participant is drawn to consider new perspectives on their
practice, is equally an integral aspect of pedagogy in relation to the process. Indeed, this
emerged as the sub-category most frequently identified within the studies. A similar
emphasis on the role of discourse in reflective learning is also evident within Brockbank
and McGill (2007). The personal basis, meanwhile, plays a significant role in enabling
a process to unfold suitably, as with the willingness to engage, but also more directly in
the contribution that experience makes to providing material on which to focus the
process. While the wider context may be regarded as more remote from the actual
process, it does still shape both learning and the reflective process, given for instance
the actual scope within the workplace to make changes in practice during or following a
reflective process. A clear link is further evident between the intended learning
outcomes and the focus of the reflective process. The theoretical basis for the process is
also relevant, as we will consider in further detail with reference to the sub-sample.
    These major categories may all be linked in a relatively open way through what we
term the ‘directed reflective process’. The term ‘reflective process’ itself highlights the
range of possible approaches to and the need to select from within this range; while the
word ‘directed’, which we interpret to allow for the possibility of self-direction,
emphasises the way in which the process must both be targeted and sustained, where
possible through ensuring alignment across the different elements of the framework,
enabling it to be pursued to the necessary depth, and yielding the intended or emergent
outcomes. Alternatively we can think of these different elements of the framework as
conditions to be met if specific forms of reflection or outcomes are to occur.
    The sweep of issues covered by the framework is indeed large; theories of learning
may be said typically to focus on one or two of these aspects, as with the social
construction or the cognitive construction of learning, peer learning in the workplace or
theories of reflection themselves. While we present the idea of alignment between these
elements as important, it is also evident that the interplay between the different elements
will be complex, potentially making it difficult to effect alignment, particularly where
there is limited control over some elements of the framework. While both detailed
consideration of the studies themselves and observations in relation to practice will help
us to offer an initial synthesis of the different elements of the framework, more
sophisticated analysis (which we will address in the further paper) would benefit from a
broader theoretical perspective, such as that provided by social realism (see for instance
Archer, 2000) which considers the interplay between social structure and human
agency.
     Within the set of included studies, we thus identify here a sub-sample of six studies
for which proforma data was most frequently linked to sub-categories, that remained
closest to the context of a programme for new academics, and which report a
theoretically based intervention. The studies within this sub-sample that directly focus
on programmes for new academics were Bell (2001), Booth and Anderberg (2005), Ho
(2000) and Staniforth and Harland (2003). We also include two studies in the sub-
sample that focus more generally on the professional development of academic staff:
Lyons (2006); and MacKinnon (2001). Level of experience is certainly one factor that
affects how a reflective process unfolds, but these studies nonetheless address a range of
relevant issues. We provide in Table 2 a summary description of the match with the
framework, citing examples of overlap with the major categories. The match itself was
made on the basis of a finer level of detail, with Bell (2001), for instance, contributing
on 18 occasions to sub-categories, including: tasks such as ‘Peer observation’ and
‘Action-research’; a social basis that incorporated the sub-categories ‘Feedback’,
‘Questioning’ and ‘Respect amongst peers’; and outcomes such as ‘Capacity for
reflection on practice’ and ‘Capacity for practice’.
    It is helpful also in reaching a synthesis to consider in Table 2 the theoretical basis
for each study within sub-sample. We see the inclusion of theories on the nature of
reflection within these studies, although the notion of reflective practice from Schön is
still dominant. Bell (2001), for instance, while drawing on Schön, qualifies this with
further reference to the internal reflective and external technical dimensions of practice
from Brookfield (1986). But a significant contribution comes from theories of
professional learning. Mackinnon (2001) draws on Boud’s theories of professional
learning (see for instance Boud, 1999) in recognizing that it is sites for academic
practice that primarily influence academic identity. Action research similarly places the
professional context at the heart of the learning process. Recognition of the value of a
socialization linked directly to the professional context is also evident, in helping to
foster possibilities for new insights, challenge, and ultimately, changes in practice and
identity.

Study            Theoretical basis for programme            Overlaps with framework
Bell (2001)      Reflective practitioner (Schön); action    Action research provides a focus for social
                 research (Lewin); critical thinking        interaction to support the reflective process,
                 (Brookfield); lifelong learning            while incorporating personal engagement in
                 (Brookfield, Candy and Mezirow);           relation to levels of experience and the work
                 learning in practice contexts (Boud) and   context.
                 others.
Booth and        Practice-Experience-Theory model;          Developing insights into personal teaching
Anderberg        nature of knowledge (Ryle);                stances, and action research. Use of
(2005)           phenomenography and variation theory       discussion and collaborative writing, with
                 (Marton); knowledge capabilities           consideration given to language and the
                 (Bowden); reflective problematisation.     practice setting.
Ho (2000)        Conceptions of teaching (Trigwell and      Seven-stage process involving reflection on
                 Prosser); theories of action (Argyris &    espoused conceptions of teaching and actual
                 Schön); conceptual change (Posner);        practice, involving challenges, insights from
                 social change (Lewin) and others.          the literature, and planning subsequent
                                                            practice. Addresses the work environment
                                                            and professional experience.
Staniforth and   Collaborative action research (Carr and    Action research supported online, with a
Harland          Kemmis)                                    supportive and critical community. Covers
(2003)                                                      tensions between research and teaching, and
                                                            professional identity.
Lyons (2006)     Reflective inquiry (Dewey); reflective     Involves creation of a teaching portfolio,
                 practitioner (Schön); scholarship of       with support stemming from the regular
                 teaching (Boyer).                          sharing of entries, links to literature
                                                            Considers the relevance of personal,
                                                            professional and institutional elements.
MacKinnon        Consultation as a working alliance         Teaching observations, supported by a
(2001)        (Bordin); learning in practice contexts   structured process of reflection; involving a
              (Boud).                                   partnership with a consultant, observational
                                                        tools and taking account of the context for
                                                        practice.

Table 2: Theoretical basis for the programmes reported within the sub-sample studies

   In addition there are theories of knowledge and of professional action. The use of
action research, for instance, cuts across these different areas, in viewing the
practitioner as central to process, both in engaging in and investigating an aspect of
practice. Epistemology plays a key role in ensuring a process addresses supporting
grounds for practice, and thus in helping to frame further conclusions. Stenhouse et al
(1979), indeed, points out that a focus on the fundamental structures of knowledge in
any discipline is a critical part of any educational endeavour. Ho (2000) shows how a
programme can involve a reflective process in relation to the fundamental structures of
knowledge within a professional field. Theories of reflection, practice, knowledge and
learning in professional contexts may thus all serve to provide direction for, or shape to,
the reflective process. The reflective processes involved in the sub-sample studies are
designed around such considerations, helping to ensure a consistent approach across the
elements of the framework.

The Outcomes of Reflective Processes Employed on Programmes

This above analysis is important for understanding the characteristics of reflective
processes employed in contexts of initial professional education, but it also enables us
to explore the outcomes associated with the use of reflective processes on programmes
for new academic staff.
    Table 3 provides an overview of the outcomes claimed within the sub-sample
studies. The reported outcomes primarily concern enhanced capacity for practice, ability
to engage in specific accessible reflective processes (although the extent to which an
increase in ability could be directly attributed to a programme was typically less clear)
and to engage in, become aware of, or understand aspects of practice; with these
specific outcomes affecting the majority of subjects involved. For instance, Lyons
(2006) argues that the creation of a reflective teaching portfolio enabled the university
teachers to redirect their practice in line with their new insights, establishing a link in
this case between capacity to engage in a specific reflective process and enhanced
capacity for practice. While changes may be been evident in practice, it is further clear
that when entire cohorts are considered there is significant variation for individual
members of staff, ranging from little to extensive change in practice.
    However, claims for entire cohorts achieving potentially more demanding forms of
reflection, such as critical reflection or premise reflection were not in evidence either in
the sub-sample studies or in the main sample. Indeed, the most commonly identified
outcomes in the main sample also concerned changes in practice and in the ability to
engage in specific reflective processes, with changes in personal qualities or
professional identity seen far less frequently (although claims made in some studies
suggest that these are more likely to occur where the staff are experienced). Any
potential evidence for the achievement of wider outcomes, such as commitment to
professional development, changes in professional identity or more demanding forms of
reflection comes from a limited proportion of the participants on a programme.
   It seems likely that change of this order involves factors beyond the control of a
programme. A research culture within an institution, for instance, is a well known factor
in over-riding professional commitment to teaching (see, for instance, Prosser et al,
2006). Moreover, the programmes involved are usually part-time and modest in scale,
typically covering at most 600 notional hours of learning at masters-level. One might
also consider the way in which dominant ideologies affect the attainment of the more
demanding outcomes. Studies from the related field of action research are helpful here:
thus Carr and Kemmis (2005) refer to difficulties evident in practitioners realising a
specific vision of criticality. They argue that technical means-end approaches reflect the
ideology sustaining the culture of modernity, an ideology at odds with their approach.

Study          Outcomes                                                          Context
Bell (2001)    For more than three quarters: ability to engage in the            Programme for new
               reflective process (although only for two more experienced        academic staff, with
               participants attaining a more critical dimension); development    study based on self-
               of ideas about teaching; changes to practice; developing          reports from 28
               collegiality. For most participants: improved confidence.         participants.
               Towards one half: an influence on longer-term professional
               development. For less than one quarter: critical reflection
               identifying a gap between theories in practice and espoused
               theories.
Booth and      Most new members of academic staff on the programme               Short course for new
Anderberg      reported changing their teaching, with evidence generally         teaching staff, and a
(2005)         across the cohort of increased capacity to engage in different    more extended
               aspects of the reflective process, as with linking theory and     continuation course;
               practice, and bringing knowledge to bear on student learning.     involving 23
                                                                                 participants.
Ho (2000)      Conceptual change in two thirds of the participants on the        Non-accredited short
               programme for new academic staff. All these participants          course for academic
               changed their teaching practices in the following academic        staff taken on a
               year. For one half of the teachers who changed conceptions a      voluntary basis.
               positive impact was observed on their students’ approaches to
               learning.
Staniforth     Evidence for mutual support assisting staff to engage in the      Covers two voluntary
and Harland    reflective processes involved, some evidence from self-           programmes for new
(2003)         reports that some participants on the programme for new           academics (in the UK
               academic staff began to see a change in their academic            and in New Zealand).
               identity, viewing themselves as change agents. Only
               occasional direct evidence for changed practice.
Lyons (2006)   Ability to engage in a reflective portfolio process and greater   Three experienced
               awareness of teaching, re-conceptualisation of and changes in     members of staff,
               practice , increased student focus, changes in practice, and      creating portfolios.
               intentions to change practice.
MacKinnon      Ability to engage in the reflective process in evidence,          One experienced
(2001)         changes to teaching, increased expectations of students,          member of staff, using
               enhanced professional identity and confidence as a teacher        observational feedback
               and sense of self-efficacy, although more attention was
               devoted in the study to technical and pedagogic aspects of
               reflection.

Table 3 Outcomes reported in the sub-sample studies reporting relevant interventions,
with contextual information
Rhetoric and Legitimacy

It is instructive to compare these findings with observations from our integral study on
the state of practice on programmes for new academic staff. It was evident in the state
of practice study that the notion ‘reflection’ was central to the headline purpose of all
the programmes covered: whether to develop a ‘reflective approach to the practice of
teaching and the support of learning in higher education’ or involving the ‘Use of
reflection as a tool for critical thought on the teaching and learning process’. Terms
such as ‘reflection’ or ‘reflective practice’ were, however, only rarely unpacked within
the documentation. While exploration of their meaning might well occur during a
programme, it was clear in the documentation that the ability to engage in a reflective
process was not simply an end in itself. Other intended outcomes flowing from the
application of reflective processes included the ability to innovate, the willingness to
take risks, a framework for career long development and so on. A direct link was made
in each programme between reflective processes and professional development, with the
use of reflection to support self-improvement and adaptation of practice prevalent to
varying extents, as with one programme which sought to promote ‘a framework for …
career-long development based on reflective practice’. This was typically set within a
context of change within higher education.
    Our above findings, however, indicated that evidence for the attainment of many
such wider outcomes was not seen across an entire cohort. Programmes that claim that
their participants attain outcomes that apply to the longer term or that concern identity
or demanding forms of reflection may find it difficult to substantiate their position;
raising the possibility that the claims may serve other purposes than simply to represent
the actual outcomes for participants. Programme documentation, indeed, is employed
for accreditation purposes; the programmes concerned were accredited by the Higher
Education Academy, and in some cases also the Staff and Educational Development
Association. At the time of the review, both of these bodies required programmes to
promote reflection on practice.
    Edwards and Nicoll (2006) also argue that the language of reflective practice forms
part of the discourse of professional development, set within a context of change (p118).
Edwards and Nicoll suggest that there is a certain attractiveness to the language of
reflective practice, advocating as it does open-mindedness and a readiness to question
on the part of the audience. They contend that such language is employed in part to
legitimize the need for professional development: ‘The rhetoric of reflective practice
may be powerful, not in the sense of whether it is literally true, but in the ways in which
it is persuasive and the work it attempts to do.’ (p123)
    It is also clear, though, that this discourse of reflective practice, or indeed
professional development, is not always accepted within the workplace setting of the
participants. Fanghanel (2004) argues that reflective practice generally underpins the
environment for teaching and learning present on programmes for new academic staff.
She highlights dissonance between this environment and the environment in operation
within the workplace settings of the programme participants, whether in relation to
practice, structure, ideology or epistemology. Trowler and Cooper (2002) similarly
show incongruities between self-theories, exercise of power, discourses within
disciplines, and underlying assumptions operating within these two settings.
    Our review reveals further complexities, in that reflective processes applied to
practice were seen to be sensitive to both personal and social engagement, and to the
nature of the connection with the workplace. Learning that is based on a reflective
process within a programme is thus likely to be affected by incongruities between the
environments of professional education and professional practice. Indeed, we can posit
a cycle in which dissonances result in a weaker attainment of outcomes linked to
reflection on practice, leading to a widening of the gap between the language employed
on a programme and the outcomes that are actually realized. Care is thus needed in
designing reflective processes for use on a programme for new academic staff, to ensure
that the nature of practice within the workplace settings of the participants is taken fully
into account; and even for reflective processes to be applied to consider this gap
between the practice and training environments.

Conclusions

This review has sought to enhance our understanding of reflective processes employed
within programmes for new academic staff, developing a framework that synthesises
insights from across the literature. This framework provides a means to understand
ways in which reflective processes may be based on theories from a range of domains,
whether in relation to practice, knowledge or pedagogy; rather than simply relying on
theorization in relation to reflection itself.
    We were further able to explore a potential gap between rhetoric and reality on
programmes for new academic staff. Claims for a wide set of intended learning
outcomes, including those that concerned professional identity or more demanding
categories of reflection, were never seen in the literature included within the review to
be achieved for an entire cohort. Programmes are thus particularly advised when
shaping or supporting reflective processes to consider the relevance of professional
context, given the tensions exposed within this study. Professional learning is a complex
area, one in which care is needed when matching intended learning outcomes with what
participants on a programme can realistically achieve.
    We recognize here that further research to assess the methodological adequacy of the
studies included within the sub-sample would assist in judging of effectiveness more
directly. It would, for instance, be possible for professional researchers to support a
practitioner review in the way that action research is often supported by researchers.
However, we have seen various insights stemming from our synthesis and from the
associated descriptions of coherent theoretically-informed approaches. Elliot (2001),
indeed, argues that generalization in relation to the effectiveness of a given educational
practice remains of relatively limited use in comparison to knowledge that is more
directly actionable by practitioners.
    In looking to adapt practice on programmes for new academic staff, or indeed in
relation to the pedagogy of reflective learning and practice more widely, the experience
of the reviewers themselves is instructive, in that insights into the application of the
literature to practice stemmed both from the ongoing dialogue within the review team,
as much as from reading specific studies, as explored in the associated study of the
methodology for the review (Kahn et al, 2007). Practitioners seeking to learn from this
report might thus find it helpful both to engage with the sub-sample of studies, in
dialogue with colleagues. A shared understanding of reflection is clearly an important
first step in moving practice forward.
    Research into the characteristics and wider effectiveness of programmes for new
academic staff should further take into account theories of knowledge, practice and
learning. Similar considerations are also likely to apply to research on the use of
reflective processes within a range of professional contexts. Indeed, the framework
developed here may be of wider interest in achieving a synthesis in relation to the
pedagogy of reflective processes, when associated theories of professional practice and
knowledge are also considered.
   This paper has not sought to provide a blueprint for the use of reflective processes
within programmes for new academic staff, or indeed to seek straightforwardly to claim
that the use of such processes are effective. Rather we have aimed to develop
understanding of the ways in which a theoretical basis in notions of reflection,
pedagogy, knowledge and practice may contribute to making legitimate claims for the
place of reflective processes in the professional education of new academics, and to
shaping practice in an informed fashion.

Acknowledgements

We are grateful to the Higher Education Academy for funding this research, and to
Jenny Moon, Terry Wareham and Liz Evans for their roles in the project.


Notes on contributors

Peter Kahn is an Educational Developer at the University of Liverpool. His books
include Developing your Teaching (Kahn and Walsh, 2006, Routledge) and A Guide to
Staff and Educational Development (Kahn and Baume, 2003, Kogan Page).

Richard Young works in Academic Staff Development at the University of Newcastle,
leading the Postgraduate Certificate in Academic Practice.

Sue Grace is Programme Director of the Postgraduate Certificate in Academic Practice
at the University of York

Ruth Pilkington is Course Leader of the MEd (Professional Practice in Higher
Education) and the Postgraduate Certificate in Learning and Teaching in Higher
Education at University of Central Lancashire.

Linda Rush is Senior Lecturer in Teaching and Learning Development at Edge Hill
University. She leads the university’s Postgraduate Certificate in Teaching and Learning
Support in Higher Education.

Bland Tomkinson is the University Adviser on Pedagogic Development at the University of
Manchester and Programme Director for the Academic Staff Programme.

Ian Willis is Programme Director for the Postgraduate Certificate in Learning and
Teaching in Higher Education at the University of Liverpool.


References

Archer, M. (2000). Being human: the problem of agency. Cambridge: Cambridge
   University Press.
Bell, M. (2001). ‘Supported Reflective Practice: a Programme of Peer Observation and
    Feedback for Academic Teaching Development.’ International Journal for
    Academic Development 6(1): pp.29-39.
Booth, S. and Anderberg, E. (2005). Academic Development for Knowledge
    Capabilities: Learning, Reflecting and Developing. Higher Education Research and
    Development, 24, 373-386.
Boud, D. (1999). Situating Academic Development in Professional Work: Using Peer
    Learning. International Journal for Academic Development 4, 3-13.
Boud, D. and Walker, D. (1990). Making the most of experience, Studies in Continuing
    Education. 12, 2, 61-80.
Brockbank, A. and McGill, I. (2007). Facilitating reflective learning in higher
    education. Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Brookfield, S. (1986). Understanding and facilitating adult learning. San Francisco:
    Jossey-Bass.
Burton, L. (2004). A new venture–bridging the gap between educational research and
    policy and practice. British Educational Research Journal, 30, 3-7.
Carr, W. and Kemmis, S. (2005). Staying critical. Educational Action Research, 13,
    347-328.
Clegg, S., Tan, J., Saeidi, S. (2002). Reflecting or Acting? Reflective Practice and
    Continuing Professional Development Programmes in Higher Education. Reflective
    Practice 3,131 – 146.
Cooper, H. and Hedges, L. (Eds) (1994). The handbook of research synthesis. New
    York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Dewey, J. (1933). How we think: a restatement of the relation of reflective thinking to
    the educative process. Boston: D C Heath.
Edwards, R. and Nicoll, K. (2006). Expertise, Competence and Reflection in the
    Rhetoric of Professional Development. British Educational Research Journal, 32,
    115-131.
Elliott, J. (2001). Making evidence-based practice educational. British Educational
    Research Journal, 27, 555-574.
Fanghanel, J. (2004). ‘Capturing Dissonance in University Teacher Education’. Studies
    in Higher Education, 29, 575-590.
Gilbert A and Gibbs G (1998). A Proposal for an international collaborative research
    programme to identify the impact of initial training on university teachers. Research
    and Development in Higher Education Series, 21, Higher Education Research and
    Development Society of Australasia, Wellington: NZ, 131-43.
Glaser, B. (1998). Doing grounded theory: issues and discussions. Mill Valley, CA:
    Sociology Press.
Ho, A.S.P. (2000). A Conceptual Change Approach to Staff Development: A Model for
    Curriculum Design. International Journal for Academic Development, 5, 30-41.
Kreber, C. (2004). An Analysis of Two Models of Reflection and their Implications for
    Educational Development. International Journal for Academic Development, 9, 29-
    49.
Kahn, P.E., Young, R., Grace, S., Pilkington, R., Rush, L., Tomkinson, C. B. and
    Willis, I. (2006). The role and effectiveness of reflective practices in programmes
    for new academic staff: a grounded practitioner review of the research literature.
    York: Higher Education Academy.
Kahn, P.E., Wareham, T., Young, R., Willis, I. and Pilkington, R. (2007). Exploring a
    practitioner-based interpretive approach to reviewing research literature. Submitted
    to International Journal of Research and Method in Education.
Lyons, N. (2006). Reflective Engagement as Professional Development in the Lives of
   University Teachers. Teachers and Teaching: Theory and Practice, 12, 151-168.
MacKinnon, M.M. (2001). Using Observational Feedback to Promote Academic
   Development. International Journal for Academic Development, 6, 21-28.
Moon, J.A. (2000). Reflection in learning and professional development. London:
   Kogan Page.
Pawson, R. (2002). Evidence-based policy: the promise of ‘realist synthesis’.
   Evaluation, 8, 340–358.
Prebble, T. et al (2004). Impact of Student Support Services and Academic Development
   Programmes on Student Outcomes in Undergraduate Tertiary Study, Massey
   University College of Education, New Zealand (Online, accessed 25 April 2005),
   http://www.minedu.govt.nz/web/downloadable/dl10247_v1/ugradstudentoutcomes.p
   df.
Prosser, M., Richardson, M., Bence, V., Hanbury, A. and Kulej, M. (2006). Formative
   evaluation of accredited programmes. York: Higher Education Academy.
Rickinson, M., Clark, A., Dawson, L., McLeod, S., Poulton, P., Sargent, J. (2004). What
   on earth has research got to do with me? Teacher Development, 8, 201-220.
Schön, D.A. (1983). The Reflective Practitioner: how professionals think in action.
   New York: Basic Books.
Slavin, R.E. (1986). Best evidence synthesis: an alternative to meta-analytic and
   traditional reviews. Educational Researcher, 15, 5-11.
Staniforth, D. and Harland, T. (2003). Reflection on Practice: Collaborative Action
   Research for New Academics. Educational Action Research, 11, 79-92.
Stenhouse, L., Verma, G., Wild, R. and Nixon, J. (1979). Problems and effects of
   teaching about race relations. London: Ward Lock.
Trowler, P. and Cooper, A. (2002). Teaching and learning regimes: implicit theories and
   recurrent practices in the enhancement of teaching and learning through educational
   development programmes. Higher Education Research and Development, 21, 221-
   240.
Weed M (2005). Meta-interpretation: a method for the interpretive synthesis of
   qualitative research. Forum: Qualitative Social Research, 6, 1, 37.
