     REGISTERED COMPANY NUMBER: 12435820 (England and Wales)
                        REGISTERED CHARITY NUMBER: 1191599




   REPORT OF THE TRUSTEES AND

     FINANCIAL STATEMENTS

 FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 IUNE 2023

                FOR

   AUTISM CENTRE OF EXCELLENCE
(A COMPANY LIMITED BY GUARANTEE)




           Hartley Fowler LLP
        Chartered Accountants
        4th Floor Tuition House
        27-37 St George's Road
               Wimbledon
                London
              Swig 4EU
AUTISM CENTRE OF EXCELLENCE

CONTENTS OF THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 3UNE 2023




                                              Page

Chairman's    Report                         1 to    3

Report of the Trustees                          to 12

Independent    Examiner's Report                13

Statement of Financial Activities               14

Statement of Financial Position

Statement of Cash Flows                         16

Notes to the Statement of Cash Flows            17

Notes to the Financial Statements            18 to 26

Detailed Statement of Financial Activities   27 to 28
AUTISM CENTRE OF EXCELLENCE

CHAIRMAN'S REPORT
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 3UNE 2023



Latest research suggests that as many as 1 in 36 people could be autistic. Autistic people are our neighbours, living in
virtually every street across the country. Unfortunately too many are unsupported. They face inequalities and too often
their rights are not being met.

We have placed autistic people at the heart of what we do. We are committed to listening carefully to them and hearing
what they need most. I would like to thank the thousands of autistic people who participated in surveys, consultations
and panel discussions during the year. I would also like to thank those who represent autistic people who are non-verbal
and struggle to have a voice. Parents, carers and loved ones have given us invaluable insights into what is needed. All of
them are shaping our thinking and priorities. All of them are inspiring and challenging us to campaign and ddive the
change they so badly need.

Statistics paint an uncomfortable picture for our society with dramatic reductions in autistic people's life expectancy.
There is no doubt that these early deaths are largely avoidable - they are the outcome of systemic failures. Diagnosis is
slow - 2 or 3 years is not unusual and waiting lists have reached unacceptable levels. Interventions, support and care are
poorly-evidenced, under-funded and inconsistently delivered. Many autistic people receive no support at all after their
diagnosis. Inequalities in access to education and employment result in autistic people being isolated, stigmatised    and
discriminated against in all stages and walks of life.

We believe the life-long (and largely unseen) battle against inequality is an unnecessary fact of life for autistic people   and
their families. Basic rights, which the vast majority of citizens are able to take for granted, are not being met.

The Autism Centre of Excellence at Cambridge (ACE) is a science-led campaigning charity working closely with Cambridge
University's Autism Research Centre and other academic partners in the UK and around the world. Dur aim is to remove
barriers and stigma for autistic people. We commission breakthrough science, campaigns and partnerships to scale
interventions, tools and adaptations to:

1. Improve inclusion, acceptance, respect and human            rights of autistic people

2. Improve support for autistic people in health and wellbeing, education,           employment    and cdiminal justice

3. Reduce avoidable deaths caused by suicide, epilepsy or other health conditions
4. Reduce avoidable    hardship   in life caused   by inequality,   exclusion, isolation or maltreatment.

The order   in which   we tackle these four areas has been educated by evidence and by working to ensure that we
maximise positive impact on the most autistic people in the shortest time while avoiding duplication where other charities
can deliver better than we can.

Right now, autistic people are routinely excluded from official Government data, simply because people completing
surveys are not asked if they are autistic. This data inequality means that the poor outcomes that autistic people
experience are not reflected in official Government data. We have sought to change this by launching our own State of
Life survey with questions that reflect a range of official Government data sources. This work will allow us to present the
Government with directly comparable data specifically about autistic people's lives and outcomes.

From our work so far and previous research it is clear that there is a worsening mental health crisis in the community-
autistic people sulfer severe anxiety and depression with 8 in 10 reporting mental health problems. This is a crisis playing
out in families, homes, schools, the NHS and hospitals, social care and residential settings all over the country.

The consequences are devastating - two thirds of autistic people responding to surveys have considered suicide. One
third of autistic have planned or attempted to take their own life. These mental health problems have their roots in a
society which routinely fails to understand or invest in meeting the needs of autistic people.

During the year over 800 autistic people fed into the development phase of a programme we have designed to respond
directly to this crisis. With their insights as fuel, we have set a goal (which we cannot deliver alone) to reduce the
incidence of mental health problems by half in 10 years. By the year end we had:

  Designed the largest autism community        dialogue around mental health and suicide prevention

— Raisedfunds to enable the commissioning of the UK's largest ever autism and suicide science research programme               to
be commissioned and delivered between 2023 to 2026
AUTISM CENTRE OF EXCELLENCE

CHAIRMAN'S REPORT
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 IUNE 2023


- Opened up dialogue with Government and the implementation              of its National Suicide Prevention Strategy

- Worked with NHS England to shape our approach to research methodology and priorities

- Consulted   with charities leading autism service delivery and on the front line of suicide prevention      in the UK


- Identified and partnered     with pioneering   organisations   using technology to provide crisis mental health support   services
to the wider population,     in order   to analyse anonymised    data from autistic people for the first time

It takes a great deal of courage for autistic people and families to speak up about their experiences. We have been both
moved and motivated by what we have heard. We will not wait for every piece of research to conclude and report before
we act - we are already feeding into Government's implementation plans. We are collaborating with partners to evidence
effectiveness and to think through adaptations for tools, apps and interventions. We are also building a UK coalition of
autism groups, academics, politicians and activists to campaign for system change across the NHS, education and social
care. We believe this work can and will reduce avoidable hardship in life, improve responses to those in crisis and reduce
avoidable deaths.

More widely on our health agenda, we have developed a flagship project to improve inclusion in sport and activity. We
have convened partners including British Cycling and the England and Wales Cricket Board, leading leisure provider
Parkwood Leisure, Mencap, Neurodiverse Sport, Sporting Equals and the National Academy for Social Prescribing. Our
work will establish a 5-year programme which will build a strong evidence base and engagement with NGBs, clubs, locally
trusted organisations, leisure centres and social prescribing networks. Initiatives will be designed with autistic people and
their parents and carers to overcome specific barriers that currently exist within sport, physical activity and leisure.

During the year we funded   652, 106.00 for a grant writer position at the Autism Research Centre — this was referenced
last year but the funds were paid in the financial period io 3une 2023. The immediate priority for grant applications has
been funding diagnosis research. The latest NHS figures show that 172,022 people in England were waiting for an autism
assessment in December 2023; we have supported the efforts of the University of Cambridge to design and implement
research which seeks to reduce the complexity and time taken to diagnose autism. The research will test if General
Practitioners (GPs) can diagnose autism accurately. Patients (or parents) will be asked to complete a series of brief
validated screening instruments online prior to the GP appointments. We will train GPs about what to lookfor in a patient
presenting with concerns about autism. We aim to test the accuracy of GP diagnosis in 250 autistic individuals of any age
across 25 GP practices. The resulting outcomes will be used to shape the national conversation about NHS diagnostic
services and how to end the huge waits autistic people face when seeking what can be a life-changing diagnosis.

Recognising the critical role of employment as the bridge io inclusion and improved mental health, we will prioritise
working inside companies to develop and codify best practice adaptations and training. We continue to partner with
large-scale organisations     to do that.

Current unemployment stands at around 80 per cent and during the year we took the decision to fund our employment
workstream to conduct analysis into the most prospective areas for improving employment rates. This work has identified
a clear opportunity to work with social enterprises to enable expansion in the heart of communities. Overall, we have set
ourselves an ambitious goal of working with partners to increase autistic jobs by 10,000 in ten years.

We will continue to build on existing research into the adverse outcomes experienced by autistic people in contact with or
within the criminal justice system. The research found that only half of autistic people (52%) were considered by the
police to be vulnerable adults, even though the law recognises all autistic people as vulnerable. Only a quarter (25%) of
autistic people were given 'reasonable adjustments', with 38% not given any even though lawyers stated that this would
have been beneficiak This is despite all autistic people being entitled to reasonable adjustments under the law. This
consistent lack of support throughout the criminal justice systems points to the need for Partnerships and projects to look
at the improvements and adaptations needed to ensure fair and equal treatment for autistic people from street policing
to stations, courts and prisons.

Strong governance and risk management has ensured that the charity remains in a strong financial position and able to
invest in the best talent to deliver social value and impact. Trustees take a conservative view of reserves reflecting the
current uncertain global economic outlook and we can report donations of for the year of 6855, 508. Total income for the
year was marginally lower than 2022 at 6886, 127, while grants awarded increased by 16% to 6385, 000 including music
therapy and funding a grant writer at the Autism Research Centre at the University of Cambridge.
AUTISM CENTRE OF EXCELLENCE

CHAIRMAN'S REPORT
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2023


Jason Arday is a British sociologist, wditer and fundraiser best known for his research on race and racism. He was diagnosed as
autistic aged 3 years old. He began an appointment as Professor of Sociology of Education at the University of Cambridge        in

2023,   becoming  the youngest  black  person  ever appointed to a  professorship at Cambridge. The board  unanimously agreed  to
appoint 3ason to the Board of Trustees during the meeting on 26th March 2024. His duties will officially smrt once his paperwork
has been finalised during March 2024.

It was with sadness that we announced the decision        by 3on Cheyette to step down as CEO of the charity in )une 2023. I am
extremely grateful for the contribution 3on has made to this chapter of the Autism Centre of Excellence. He has worked with total
commitment, integrity and dedication. Equally important, he cares deeply about the cause of autistic people and reversing the
inequalities they face. His values are unwavering and he uses a strong sense of social justice as his fuel. As Chair of Trustees but
also as a parent, I would like to thank him for his thoughtful and hard work on behalf of autistic people everywhere.

In the second half of 2023, the board formed a Nominations Committee (NomCo) and ran a robust process to select a new CEO.
An independent      adviser was appointed to work with the NomCo to craft the job specification and to design and manage an
inclusive advertising, search and selection process. The Nomco reviewed 10 candidates in detail from around around 50 applicants
and met with six before finalising a shortlist of four for panel interviews.

Tom Purser was appointed our new CEO in December 2023 and joined the chadity in 3anuary 2024. Tom joins us from the
National Autistic Society where he has spearheaded high profile and impactful campaigns to drive greater public understanding     of
autism and launch new support services. He has extensive experience      working  with  Government,  employers  and funders, as well
as autistic people and their families, to bring about positive change in people's lives. Tom is an energetic champion of rights and
we look forward to his leadership as we seek to grow our impact significantly in the coming years.

Finally,   I would   like to thank our donors who supportvital work; our dedicated trustees who guide the charity strategically   and
responsibly;    and our ambassadors who put their weight  and reputations behind everything we do.




Fraser Hardie

Chair of Trustees

26 March 2024
AUTISM CENTRE OF EXCELLENCE (REGISTERED NUMBER: 12435820)

REPORT OF THE TRUSTEES
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2023




The Trustees present their report along with the financial statement of the charity for the year ending 30th June 2023.
The financial statements comply with the governing document and Accounting and Reporting by Charities SORP (FRS
102) 'Accounting and Reporting by Charities: Statement of Recommended Practice applicable to charities preparing their
accounts in accordance with the Financial Reporting Standard applicable in the UK and Republic of Ireland (FRS 102)
(effective 1 January 2019).

OBJECTIVES AND ACTIVITIES
Objects in the Governing Document
The objects of the charity are to promote the health and wellbeing, and advance the education of autistic people                and
their famiTies by:

—
    providing    or assisting in the provision of clinical and social care services for autistic people or people with   associated
communication,        social or behavioural conditions and their families;

- advancing the education,       training   or employment opportunities for such people and advancing     the education of others
in autism,      associated communication,     social or behavioural conditions; and

- the encouragement, support and promotion of research into autism and related subjects (and the publication         and
dissemination of the useful results of such research), in particular with a view in developing new and validated methods
for assessment, intervention and treatment.

Public benefit
The trustees confirm that they have referred to the guidance contained in the Charity Commission's general guidance on
public benefit when reviewing the charity's aims and objectives and in planning future activities and setting       the
grant-making policies for the charity.

Grantmaking
The charity publishes   research funding opportunities as open calls via autismcentreofexcellence. org. These are open to
applicants at UK-based research institutions. Potential applicants are given at least three weeks from the date of the call
to make an initial expression of interest. These are reviewed by a subgroup of Trustees who use the criteria specified in
the published call to select those they would like to proceed to full applications. At least two weeks are then allowed for
preparation of full applications, which must include the following:

    Details of research questions, methodology,      expected analysis and type of results to be delivered.

- Rationale for how the research could be translated into relevant impact for autistic people. The translation itself            will

usually be outside of the remit of the research study, but applications should include a proposed pathway to impact.

— Details    of lead applicant from a UK-based research institution and any other researcher(s) involved.
- At least two proposed scientific peer reviewers.

- Clear timescales and budget breakdown.

- Evidence or track-record of delivering similarly scaled projects on time and on budget.

- Evidence that the proposed research would be world-class, novel, timely, and good value for money.

Within   approximately two weeks of the deadline, a subgroup of Trustees will review these applications and select a
shortlist to proceed to scientific peer review. Peer reviewers are asked to declare any conflicts of interest.         One
independent     peer reviewer is required for grants of 660,000 or under, and two for grants over this amount.
Recommendations for making awards are made by the subgroup of Trustees and final decisions are at the discretion of
the Soard. Decisions will take into account scientific peer review, best use of funds, scientific quality of applications,
potential to lead to impact, clarity of timescale, budget, deliverables and evidence of ability to deliver the proposed
project.

Conflicted trustees are excluded from the approval         process.
AUTISM CENTRE OF EXCELLENCE (REGISTERED NUMBER: 12435B20)

REPORT OF THE TRUSTEES
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 3UNE 2023



ACHIEVEMENT AND PERFORMANCE
Charitable activities
Our Achievements this year

From our work so far and previous research it is clear that there is a worsening mental health crisis in the community-
autistic people suffer severe anxiety and depression with 8 in 10 reporting mental health problems. This is a cdisis playing
out in families, homes, schools, the NHS and hospitals, social care and residential settings all over the country.

During the year over 800 autistic people fed into the development phase of a programme we have designed to respond
directly to this crisis. With their insights as fuel, we have set a goal (which we cannot deliver alone) to reduce the
incidence of mental health problems by half in 10 years. By the year end we had:

 Designed the largest autism community           dialogue around mental health and suicide prevention

- Raised funds to enable the commissioning of the UK's largest ever autism and suicide science research programme                   to
be commissioned and delivered between 2023 to 2026

- Opened up dialogue with Government and the implementation                of its National Suicide Prevention Strategy

- Worked with NHS England to shape our approach to research methodology                 and priorities

- Consulted with charities leading aubsm service delivery and on the front line of suicide prevention           in the UK


- Identified and partnered     with pioneering     organisations   using technology to provide crisis mental health support   services
to the wider population,     in order to analyse    anonymised     data from autistic people for the first time

We have developed a flagship project to improve inclusion in sport and activity. We have convened partners including
British Cycling and the England and Wales Cricket Board, leading leisure provider Parkwood Leisure,                           Mencap,
Neurodiverse Sport, Sporting Equals and the National Academy         for Social  Prescribing.   Our  work   will establish  a  5-year
programme    which will build a  strong  evidence  base  and   engagement    with  NGBs,    clubs,  locally trusted    organisations,
leisure centres and social prescribing networks. Initiatives will be designed with autistic people and their parents and
carers to overcome specific barriers that currently exist within sport, physical activity and leisure.

                            ES2, 106.00 for a grant writer position at the Autism Research Centre this was referenced
                                                                                                    —
During the year we funded
last year but the funds were paid in the financial period to june 2023. The immediate priority for grant applications has
been funding diagnosis research.

Current unemployment stands at around 80 per cent and during the year we took the decision to fund our employment
workstream to conduct analysis into the most prospective areas for improving employment rates. This work has identified
a clear opportunity to work with social enterprises to enable expansion in the heart of communities. Overall, we have set
ourselves an ambitious goal of working with partners to increase autistic jobs by 10,000 in ten years.

We will continue to build on existing research into the adverse outcomes experienced by autistic people in contact with or
within the criminal justice system. The research found that there is a consistent lack of support throughout the criminal
justice systems. It points to the need for Partnerships and projects to look at the improvements and adaptations needed
to ensure fair and equal treatment for autistic people from street policing to stations, courts and prisons.

Monitoring achievement           and measuring         impact

The success of our work will be determined by the positive impact experienced by autistic people. We will create a
framework that objectively measures our impact and calculates the value of the outcomes achieved. Positive change that
improves the lives of autistic people needs also to be measured and quantified so that we can contribute to the evidence
base of best practice for wider dissemination and benefit.
AUTISM CENTRE OF EXCELLENCE (REGISTERED NUMBER: 12435B20)

REPORT OF THE TRUSTEES
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 IUNE 2023



FINANCIAL REVIEW
Financial position
During the financial period, the charity received donations amounting to 6855, 508, some of which form part of the
unrestricted reserves. 6114,081 of the total donations received in the year were related to a restricted donation. There
were also sales of online learning resources of 627, 619. During the year charitable activity expenditure decreased in
comparison to the previous year, however funds have been set aside for projects ACE are planning to undertake in the
near future. These are discussed in more detail within the Chairman's statement.

The majority of the 6855, 508 donations received during the period came from individuals           and corporate donors. ACE is
incredibly grateful to our generous donors for their continued support.

At   30 june 2023 the charity had cash at bank of 62, 461, 120 and net assets (restricted)                  of 6447, 415 and    net
                   of 61,992,648
assets(unrestdicted)

What we funded
Having received over 6850,000 of donations during the period, the trustees will continue their commitment to funding
the Music Therapy Project whilst using any excess reserves to kick start other projects that are planned to start during
the next financial year. ACE agreed and funded a grant writer position at the ARC for 652, 106, within the University of
Cambridge, in August 2022. Along with this, ACE also paid the second tranche of 6333,333 relating to the grant for the
Music Therapy Project in August 2022.

Shortly after year end, in October 2023, the final instalment for the Music Therapy Project was paid. This concluded the
Ilm funding commitment, but ACE will continue to moniixir and support the project team. As the payment was made
after year end, the amount is still within the restricted reserves figure within the report. ACE also made a grant payment
of 6568, 322 for a suicide prevention project with the University of Cambridge.

Investment policy and objectives
Reserves of the charity are invested in short term deposits  in reputable UK financial institutions. These are held on a
short-term basis as the trustees intend to access funds to ensure the agreed priority projects can be pursued as part of
the strategic and business plan.

Resenres policy
The trustees aim to maintain free reserves   in an   unrestricted   fund that covers support, operational   and governance     costs
for twelve months.
AUTISM CENTRE OF EXCELLENCE (REGISTERED NUMBER: 12435820)

REPORT OF THE TRUSTEES
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2023



FINANCIAL REVIEW
principal risks and uncertainties
The trustees consider and assess the risks to which the charity is potentially exposed and have established systems and
procedures to review and manage those risks. The Finance and Risk sub-committee review and assess all risks and put in
place suitable and sufficient measures to mitigate the risk. This information is then recorded on the Risk Register and
reported to Trustee at quarterly board meetings for discussion and agreement.

The main risks
facing the charity
are considered to be:          Description                                      Management

Risk
Operational:
                 reliance      In a small team, there is a high degree of       - Engagement     and wellbeing    of
Key individual
                               reliance on individuals which means that         employees is a key priority of senior
                               disengagement of key staff could have a          management.
                               disruptive impact on the planned projects.
                                                                                —
                                                                                    High level of communication    to
                                                                                ensure any risks are identified and
                                                                                mitigated early.

                                                                                - Regular communication      between
                                                                                the Chair of Trustees, Director and
                                                                                employed staff.

Operational:
Failure to attract and         It could be difficult to attract new             - Good benchmarking      to industry to
hire new staff                 employees, particularly   considering the        ensure compensation      is appropriate
                               current job market.                              for the role.

                                                                                - To date the charity has not
                                                                                experienced any issue with hiring
                                                                                and typically receives a high number
                                                                                of applications for each role
                                                                                advertised.
Financial:
Failure to identify   long     The charity aims to apply for funding for a      - Ongoing funding requirements
term funding streams           range of projects to be delivered by             identified at start of projects.
                               partners. Funding for this needs to be
                               identified.
                                                                                - Prudent reserves policy to ensure
                                                                                no service provision halted in an
                                                                                unplanned manner.

                                                                                - Feasibility of different options
                                                                                being explored.

                                                                                —
                                                                                  The position of a grant writer at
                                                                                the Autism Research Centre (ARC)
                                                                                within the University of Cambridge
                                                                                has been in place since August 2022
                                                                                to ensure adequate funding
                                                                                applications.

                                                                                -Active pipeline management        and
                                                                                discussions around donation
                                                                                streams happens regularly.

                                                                                -Development of detailed
                                                                                fundraising plans.
AUTISM CENTRE OF EXCELLENCE (REGISTERED NUMBER: 12435820)

REPORT OF THE TRUSTEES
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 IUNE 2023



FINANCIAL REVIEW
The main risks
facing the charity
are considered to be:      Description                                    Management

Risk
Financial:
Failure to identify /      Competition from other charities may           - Our project development process
construct projects to be   make it more difficult for funding to be       includes extensive engagement       with
funded.                    received.                                      the autistic community and other
                                                                          stakeholders to ensure the most
                                                                          impactful projects are funded.

                                                                          - Regular planning meetings and
                                                                          monitoring of strategic direction to
                                                                          ensure we are funding the most
                                                                          promising projects which meet
                                                                          people's needs.
External:
Poor financial health of   Both the NHS and Local authorities are         - Early recognition of this position
local statutory services   reporting annual deficits which limits their   and planning for alternative
                           ability to give financial support to new       funding.
                           projects.

                           This issue will be exacerbated   by the
                           increased cost of living within the UK,        - Positioning of offer to give clear
                           caused partly by the high levels of            benefit to local services so that
                           inflation.                                     funding is prioritised.

                                                                          - Development of evidence of local
                                                                          and national economic benefit.

                                                                          - Develop methodology to calculate
                                                                          ACE impact and value for all
                                                                          projects.

                                                                          - Capitalise on other sources of
                                                                          income including funding.
External:
Loss of support from       Significantly elapsed time from                - Regular senior leadership team
the autistic community     incorporation of the charity to projects       meetings.
and wider stakeholders     starting risks losing engagement and
                           support from:

                                                                          - Project development process
                           Donors, stakeholders,   trustees and the       agreed with clear timeframes for
                           autistic community.                            delivery.

                                                                          - Regular engagement from
                                                                          established sub-committees,     such as
                                                                          the Finance and Risk Committee

                                                                          - Director of Workstreams has been
                                                                          in post since May 2022 to oversee
                                                                          the implementation of agreed
                                                                          charity priorities.

                                                                          - Regular engagement with the
                                                                          Steering Group and Community
                                                                          Advisory panel.
AUTISM CENTRE OF EXCELLENCE (REGISTERED NUMBER: 12435820)

REPORT OF THE TRUSTEES
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 IUNE 2023



FINANCIAL REVIEW
The main risks
facing the charity
are considered to be:                Description                                               Management

Risk

External:
Loss of reputation                   Failure to adequately engage with autistic                — Creation   of a Steering Group and
                                     people and their families / representatives               Community      Advisory panel.
                                     in the co-design and co-production of ACE
                                     projects risks not meeting people's need,
                                     and reputational damage to ACE, amongst
                                     the community we are seeking to support.
                                                                                               - The charity will continue to seek
                                                                                               the views of autistic people and
                                                                                               their families as we aim to
                                                                                               co-design ACE projects.

                                                                                               —
                                                                                                Community Engagement Manager
                                                                                               has been in post since May 2023 to
                                                                                               oversee the charity's relationships.

Compliance:
Failure to recognise all             As the projects  start ACE may be subject                 - Seek expert advice as required on
compliance                           to greater regulatory framework or                        compliance requirements.
requirements    as the               compliance requirements.
multiple   projects
develop.
                                     Failure to comply with this will lead to                  - Regular reports to Finance and
                                     reputational issues and enforcement                       Risk committee.
                                     processes.


FUTURE PLANS
The Autism Centre of Excellence at Cambridge has been established as a science-led campaigning charity working closely
with Cambridge University's Autism Research Centre. Our aim is to remove barriers and stigma for autistic people. We
commission breakthrough science, campaigns and partnerships to scale interventions, tools and adaptations to:

1. Improve inclusion, acceptance, respect, and human              rights of autistic people.

2. Improve support for autistic people in education, employment,              health, wellbeing, and criminal justice.

3. Reduce avoidable deaths caused by suicide, epilepsy or other health conditions.
4. Reduce avoidable      hardship   in life caused   by inequality,   exclusion, isolation or maltreatment.

We will work with autistic people, parents/carers and partner organisations to identify helpful approaches and ensure that
they are adequately evaluated. This includes commissioning world-class academic research at the University                  of
Cambridge and its international collaborators. Increasing  the amount    of evidence-based  support  that is available will be
of great benefit to autistic people and their families.

But that isn't enough. We know that these approaches can only change lives if they are widely available. The Autism
Centre of Excellence at Cambridge will therefore also partner with organisations around the world with the ability to roll
out new approaches at a large scale. We believe that high quality support should be available to all, and not be out of
reach due to costs. We will always consider funding requirements and possibilities for support to be offered in existing
pathways, such as within statutory health and social care provision.
AUTISM CENTRE OF EXCELLENCE (REGISTERED NUMBER: 12435820)

REPORT OF THE TRUSTEES
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 IUNE 2023



STRUCTURE, GOVERNANCE AND MANAGEMENT
Governing document
The charity is controlled by its governing document,     a deed of trust, and constitutes   a limited   company,   limited   by
guarantee, as defined by the Companies Act 2006.

The objects of the charity are to promote the health and wellbeing and advance the education of autistic people and their
families.

Charity constitution
The Autism Centre of Excellence at Cambridge (ACE) is a registered charity (charity no. 1191599).It is a company limited
by guarantee registered in England B Wales (company no. 12435820), whose registered office is at Douglas House, 18b
Trumpington Road, Cambridge, CB2 BAH. The charity was incorporated on 31st january 2020, and it was registered with
the Charity Commission on 2nd October 2020. These financial statements are the financial statements for the third
accounting period, during which the emphasis of the trustees has been to establish the Autism Centre of Excellence at
Cambridge as a science-led campaigning charity with the aim of removing barriers and stigma for autistic people.

Recruitment and appointment        of new trustees
New trustees are appointed by the existing trustees via a Nominations Committee. The articles of association provide         for
a minimum of three trustees and a maximum of twelve. Trustees with a range of different skill sets are sought,               to
ensure the effective running of the charity.

Organisational    structure and decision making
The charity is governed by its Board of Trustees, which met four times during the financial period, in addition to the
Annual General Meeting. A scheme of delegation is in place; the Chief Executive, has overall responsibility for the
day-to-day management of the organisation including ensuring that services are delivered in line with the operational
policies.

Induction and training of new trustees
On appointment,    new trustees sign a trustee declaration statement agreeing to give their time and expertise. The
induction pack includes the memorandum and articles of association of the charity, the most recent financial statements
and a copy of the Charity Commission's guidance 'The Essential Trustee Guide" and "Public Benefit: running a charity"
and the "Charity Governance Code for larger charities".

Key management remuneration
The pay of the Charity's key management personnel is set by the Board and is reviewed annually by the Finance
Committee, in line with both market conditions and affordability for the chadity, and a proposal is submitted to the Board
for their approval.

Related parties
All trustees give their time freely and no remuneration was paid in the year. Details of trustee expenses and related party
transactions are disclosed in the notes to the financial statements. Trustees are required to disclose all relevant interests
and register them with the chief executive and, in accordance with the charity's conflicts of interest policy, withdraw from
decisions where a conflict of interest arises.




                                                           -10-
AUTISM CENTRE OF EXCELLENCE (REGISTERED NUMBER: 12435820)

REPORT OF THE TRUSTEES
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 IUNE 2023



REFERENCE AND ADMINISTRATIVE DETAILS
Registered Company number
12435820 (England and Wales)

Registered Charity number
1191599

Registered office
Douglas House
18b Trumpington     Road
Cambridge
CB2 BAH

Trustees
F M Hardie   - Chairman
Professor 5 P Baron-Cohen
E N Binks
A I Buisson
Dr I S Hall
R A D Leeming (resigned 13/9/22)
A M l.ewy
Dr L Owens
I V Pocock
E Sakellis
Dr I LTobin
I H Penrose Buckley (appointed 3/11/23)
Chief Executive Officer
Tom Purser (appointed 29/1/24)
Ion Cheyette (resigned 16/6/23)

Independent       Examiner
Hartley Fowler LLP
Chartered Accountants
4th Floor Tuition House
27-37 St George's Road
Wimbledon
London
SW19 4EU

Bankers
Barclays Bank Pic
Leicester
Leicestershire
LE87 288

CAF Bank Ltd
25 Kings Hill Avenue
Kings Hill
West Maling
Kent
ME19 43Q




                                          -11-
AUTISM CENTRE OF EXCELLENCE (REGISTERED NUMBER: 12435820)

REPORT OF THE TRUSTEES
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 3 ONE 2023



EVENTS SINCE THE END OF THE YEAR
Information relating to events since the end of the year is given in the notes to the financial statements.

STATEMENT OF TRUSTEES' RESPONSIBILITIES
The trustees (who are also the directors of Autism Centre of Excellence for the purposes af company law) are responsible for
preparing the Annual Report and the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and United Kingdom Accounting
Standards (United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice).

Company law requires the trustees to prepare financial statements for each financial year which give a true and fair view of the
state of affairs of the charitable company and of the incoming resources and applicatian of resources, including the income and
expenditure, of the charitable company for that period. In preparing those financial statements, the trustees are required to

   select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently;
   observe the methods and principles in the Charity SORP;
   make judgements and estimates that are reasonable and prudent;
   prepare the financial statements on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate      to presume that the charitable   company
   will continue in business.


The trustees are responsible for keeping proper accounting records which disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the
financial position of the charitable company and to enable them to ensure that the financial statements comply with the
Companies Act 2006. They are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the charitable company and hence for taking
reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.

This report has been prepared      in accordance   with the special provisions   of Part 15 of the Companies Act 2006 relating to small
companies.

Approved   by order of the board   of trustees on 26 March 2024 and signed on its behalf by:




F M Hardie - Trustee




                                                                   -12-
INDEPENDENT EXAMINER'S REPORT TO THE TRUSTEES OF
AUTISM CENTRE OF EXCELLENCE



Independent        examiner's report to the trustees of Autism Centre of Excellence ('the Company' )
I report to the charity trustees on my examination      of the accounts of the Company for the year ended 30 June 2023.

Responsibilities     and basis of report
As the charity'strustees of the Company (and also its directors for the purposes of company law) you are responsible        for
the preparation of the accounts in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 ('the 2006 Act').

Having satisfied myself that the accounts of the Company are not required to be audited under Part 16 of the 2006 Act
and are eligible for independent examination, I report in respect of my examination of your charity's accounts as carried
out under Section 145 of the Charities Act 2011 ('the 2011 Act'). In carrying out my examination I have followed the
Directions given by the Charity Commission under Section 145(5) (b) of the 2011 Act.

Independent        examiner's statement
Since your charity's gross income exceeded E250, 000 your examiner must be a member of a listed body. I can confirm
that I am qualified to undertake the examination because I am a member of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in
England and Wales, which is one of the listed bodies.

I have completed     my examination. I confirm       that no matters   have come to my attention     in connection   with   the
examination   giving me cause to believe:

1.      accounting records were not kept in respect of the Company as required by Section 386 of the 2006 Act; or
2.      the accounts do not accord with those records; or
3.      the accounts do not comply with the accounting requirements of Section 396 of the 2006 Act other than any
        requirement that the accounts give a true and fair view which is not a matter considered as part of an
        independent examination; or
        the accounts have not been prepared in accordance with the methods and principles of the Statement of
        Recommended Practice for accounting and reporting by charities (applicable to charities preparing their accounts
        in accordance with the Financial Reporting Standard applicable in the UK and Republic of Ireland (FRS 102)).


I have no concerns and have come across no other matters in connection with the examination to which attention          should
be drawn in this report in order to enable a proper understanding of the accounts to be reached.




Jonathan Askew
The Institute of Chartered Accountants     in England   and Wales

Hartley Fowler LLP
Chartered Accountants
4th Floor Tuition House
27-37 St George's Road
Wimbledon
London
SW19 4EU

26 March 2024




                                                               -13-
AUTISM CENTRE OF EXCELLENCE

STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL ACTIVITIES
(INCORPORATING AN INCOME AND EXPENDITURE ACCOUNT)
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 3UNE 2023


                                                                                                 2023         2022
                                                              Unrestricted        Restricted     Total        Total
                                                                   fund             funds        funds        funds
                                                   Notes            I                               6
INCOME AND ENDOWMENTS FROM
Donations and legacies                                           741,427           114,081      855,508       897,735

Other trading activities                                           30,619                         30,619        13,440

Total                                                            772, 046          114,081      886, 127      911,175


EXPENDITURE ON
Raising funds

Charitable activities
Support and improve the lives of autistic people                 450, 497          333 333      783,830       579,512
Health and Wellbeing                                              10,475                         10,475
Employment                                                        15,000                         15,000

Total                                                            476, 419          333,333      809,752       579, 512


NET INCOME/(EXPENDITURE)                                         295, 627         (219,252)       76,375      331,663


RECONCILIATION OF FUNDS
Total funds brought forward                                    1,697, 021          666,667     2, 363,688    2, 032/025


TOTAL FUNDS CARRIED FORWARD                                    1,992,648           447, 415    2, 440, 063   2,363,688




                                       The notes form part of these financial smtements


                                                            -14-
AUTISM CENTRE OF EXCELLENCE (REGISTERED NUMBER: 12435820)

STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION
30 JUNE 2023

                                                                                                             2023               2022
                                                                  Unrestricted          Restricted           Total             Total
                                                                     fund                 funds              funds             funds
                                                    Notes                f                    f                 f                f
FIXED ASSETS
Intangible assets                                       14              2, 921                                 2, 921            3,841
Tangible assets                                         15              2, 696                                 2, 696            3,312

                                                                        5,617                                  5,617             7, 153

CURRENT ASSETS
Debtors                                                 16             13,952                                 13,952             1,422
Cash at bank                                                       2g013 ~705            447 415           2~461' 120        2 368 165

                                                                   2, 027, 657           447, 415          2,475, 072        2,369,587

CREDITORS
Amounts falling due within one year                     17             (40,626)                              (40,626)          (13,052)


NET CURRENT ASSETS                                                 1,987, 031            447, 415          2,434,446         2, 356,535


TOTAL ASSETS LESS CURRENT LIABILITIES                              1,992,648              447, 415         2 440 063         2~363 688



NET ASSETS                                                         1,992,648              447, 415         2,440,063         2, 363,688

FUNDS                                                   18
Unrestricted funds                                                                                         1,992,648         1,697,021
Restricted funds                                                                                             447, 415          666,667

TOTAL FUNDS                                                                                                2,440, 063        2, 363,688


The charitable company is entitled to exemption from audit under Section 477 of the Companies Act 2006 for the year ended
30 June 2023.

The members have not required the company to obtain an audit of its financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2023                  in
accordance with Section 476 of the Companies Act 2006.

The trustees acknowledge their responsibilities for
(a)      ensuring that the charitable company keeps accounting records that comply with Sections 386 and 387 of the Companies
        Act 2006 and
(b)      preparing financial statements which give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the charitable company as at the
         end of each financial year and of its surplus or deficit for each financial year in accordance with the requirements     of
         Secuons 394 and 395 and which otherwise comply with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 relating to financial
         siatements, so far as applicable to the charitable company.

These financial statements have been prepared    in accordance    with the provisions     applicable to charitable   companies subject to
the small companies regime.

The financial statements were approved by the Board of Trustees and authorised for issue on 26 March 2024 and were signed                 on
its behalf by:




F M Hardie - Trustee



                                          The notes form part of these financial statements


                                                                -15-
AUTISM CENTRE OF EXCELLENCE

STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 3UNE 2023


                                                                                       2023         2022
                                                 Notes                                    I           6

Cash flows from operating activities
Cash generated from operations                                                          94,399     610,265

Net cash provided by operating     activities                                           94,399     610,265


Cash flows from investing activities
Purchase of intangible fixed assets                                                                  (1,360)
Purchase of tangible fixed assets                                                       (1,444)      (1,256)

Net cash used in investing   activities                                                 (1,444)      (2,616)



Change in cash and cash equivalents in
the reporting period                                                                    92,955      607, 649
Cash and cash equivalents at the
beginning of the reporting period                                                   2, 368, 165   1,760,516

Cash and cash equivalents at the end of
the reporting period                                                                2, 461,120    2, 368, 165




                                           The notes form part of these financial statements


                                                                 -16-
AUTISM CENTRE OF EXCELLENCE

NOTES TO THE STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 IUNE 2023



     RECONCILIATION OF NET INCOME TO NET CASH FLOW FROM OPERATING ACTIVITIES
                                                                                                      2023          2022
                                                                                                       E              E
     Net income for the reporting period              (as per the Statement of
     Financial Activities)                                                                            76,375       331,663
     Adjustments for:
     Depreciation   and amortisation                                                                   2, 980        2, 524
     (Increase)/decrease    in debtors                                                               (12,530)      279,373
     Increase/(decrease)    in creditors                                                              27, 574       (3,295)

     Net cash provided by operations                                                                  94,399       610,265



2.   ANALYSIS OF CHANGES IN NET FUNDS

                                                                                    At'   1/7/22   Cash flow    At' 30/6/23
                                                                                            E           E             E
     Net cash
     Cash at bank                                                                   2, 368, 165       92, 955    2,461, 120

                                                                                    2, 368, 165       92, 955    2,461, 120

     Total                                                                           2, 368, 165      92,955     2, 461, 120




                                           The notes form part of these financial siatements


                                                                 -17-
AUTISM CENTRE OF EXCELLENCE

NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 3UNE 2023



1,   GENERAL INFORMATION

     The private charitable company is incorporated and domiciled in England and Wales. The address of its registered
     office is Douglas House, 18b Trumpington Road, Cambridge, United Kingdom, CB2 BAH . The registered number
     of the company is 12435820.The registered number of the charity 1191599

     The financial information   presented is for the year ended   30 june 2023. The financial   information     is presented   in
     sterling.

     ACCOUNTING       POLICIES

     Basis of preparing the financial statements
     The financial statements of the charitable company, which is a public benefit entity under FRS 102, have been
     prepared in accordance with the Charities SORP (FRS 102) 'Accounting and Reporling by Charities: Statement of
     Recommended Practice applicable to charities preparing their accounts in accordance with the Financial Reporting
     Standard applicable in the UK and Republic of Ireland (FRS 102) (effective I Ianuary 2019)', Financial Reporting
     Standard 102 'The Financial Reporting Standard applicable in the UK and Republic of Ireland' and the Companies
     Act 2006. The financial statements have been prepared under the historical cost convention.

     a) Going concern basis
     The "Financial Review" section of the trustees' report sets out various considerations relative to the going concern
     position of the charity and explains why the trustees continue to adopt the going concern basis in the preparation
     of these financial statements.

     b) Significant judgements and estimates
     The trustees consider that there are no areas of judgement        or estimation which materially     affect the financial
     statements.

     Income
     Allincome is recognised in the Statement of Financial Activities once the charity has entitlement         to the funds, it is
     probable that the income will be received and the amount can be measured reliably.

     Income from donations is recognised when receivable.

     Donated services are measured and valued at an estimate of the price the charity would have paid on the open
     market. An equivalent amount is recognised as an expense in the Statement of Financial Activities.

     Trading income is recognised on point of sale.

     Expenditure
     Liabilities are recognised as expenditure as soon as there is a legal or constructive obligation committing     the
     charity to that expenditure, it is probable that a transfer of economic benefits will be required in settlement and
     the amount of the obligation can be measured reliably. Expenditure is accounted for on an accruals basis and has
     been classified under headings that aggregate all cost related to the category. Where costs cannot be directly
     attributed to particular headings they have been allocated to activities on a basis consistent with the use of
     resources.

     Grants offered subject to conditions which have not been met at the year end date are noted as a commitment
     but not accrued as expenditure.

     Payments for compensation for loss of office are recognised immediately          as an expense when the charity             is
     demonstrably committed to compensate an employee for loss of office.

     Governance costs
     Since there is no direct cost to holding Trustee Board meetings and no Trustee Board expenses are reimbursed,
     governance costs only include the independent examiner's fees and accountancy fees.




                                                         -18-
AUTISM CENTRE OF EXCELLENCE

NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - continued
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 IUNE 2023



     ACCOUNTING        POLICIES - continued

     Intangible fixed assets
     Intangible   fixed assets acquired separately   are initially recognised at cost and then amortised over the following
     periods:

     Trademark costs - 5 years straight line
     Website development costs - 5 years straight line

     Tangible fixed assets
     Depreciation   is provided   at the following annual rates in order to write off each asset over its estimated        useful
     life.

     Computer equipment                33% on cost

     Taxation
     The charity is exempt from corporation tax on its charitable activities.

     Fund accounting
     Unrestricted funds can be used in accordance with the charitable objectives at the discretion of the trustees.

     Restricted funds can only be used for particular restricted purposes within the objects of the charity.         Restrictions
     arise when specified by the donor or when funds are raised for particular restricted purposes.

     Further explanation   of the nature and purpose of each fund is included     in the notes to the financial   statements.

     Foreign currencies
     Assets and liabilities in foreign currencies are translated into sterling at the rates of exchange ruling at the
     statement of financial position date. Transactions in foreign currencies are translated into sterling at the rate of
     exchange ruling at the date of transaction. Exchange differences are taken into account in arriving at the
     operating result.

     Pension costs and other post-retirement            benefits
     The charitable company operates a defined contribution pension scheme. Contributions payable to the charitable
     company's pension scheme are charged to the Statement of Financial Activities in the period to which they relate.

     Cash at bank
     Cash at bank includes bank deposit accounts and short term highly liquid investments with a short maturity                 of
     three months or less from the date of acquisition or opening of the deposit or similar account.

     Debtors
     Trade and other debtors are recognised          at the settlement   amount   due. Prepayments      are recognised     at the
     invoiced cost prepaid.

     Creditors
     Creditors are recognised when the charity has a present obligation resulting from a past event that will probably
     result in the transfer of funds to a third party and the amount due to settle the obligation can be measured    or
     estimated reliably. Creditors are normally recognised at the settlement amount.

     Impairment
     Assets not measured at fair value are reviewed for any indication that the asset may be impaired at each balance
     sheet date. If such indication exists, the recoverable amount of the asset, or the asset's cash generating unit, is
     estimated and compared to the carrying amount. Where the carrying amount exceeds its recoverable amount, an
     impairment loss is recognised in profit or loss unless the asset is carried at a revalued amount where the
     impairment loss is a revaluation decrease.




                                                           -19-
AUTISM CENTRE OF EXCELLENCE

NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - continued
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 3UNE 2023



3.   DONATIONS AND LEGACIES
                                                                                             2023                2022
                                                                                               E
     Donations                                                                              855,508             897,735


     During the year the charity received   E114,081 (2022 f725, 000) as a distribution from The Autism Research Trust.

     Pro bono support is included within donations and is valued at E12,500 (2022 Enil).

4.   OTHER TRADING ACTIVITIES
                                                                                             2023                2022
                                                                                               E                   f
     Sales - services                                                                         3,000              13,440
     Website sales                                                                           27, 619

                                                                                             30,619               13,440


5.   RAISING FUNDS

     Raising donations and legacies
                                                                                             2023                2022
                                                                                               E                   E
     Fundraising   expenses                                                                        447


6.   CHARITABLE ACTIVITIES COSTS
                                                                             Grant
                                                                           funding   of
                                                                           activities       Support
                                                                Direct     (see note       costs (see
                                                                Costs          7)           note 8)             Totals
                                                                 E             E               E                   E
     Support and improve the lives of autistic
     people                                                                 385,439         398,391             783,830
     Health and Wellbeing                                       10,475                                           10,475
     Employment                                                 15,000                                           15,000

                                                                25, 475     385,439         398,391             809,305


7.   GRANTS PAYABLE
                                                                                             2023                 2022
                                                                                                f                   E
     Support and improve the lives of autistic people                                       385,439              333,333


     In August 2022 the charity paid the second tranche of the grant awarded to The Autism               Research Centre   in
     relation to the music therapy project alongside f52, 106 relating to a grant writer award.




                                                         -20-
AUTISM CENTRE OF EXCELLENCE

NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - continued
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 3UNE 2023



8.    SUPPORT COSTS
                                                                                         Governance
                                                           Management       Finance           costs             Totals
                                                                   I           I                I                    I
      Support and improve the lives of autistic
      people                                                  391,099              658          6,634          398,391


      NET INCOME/(EXPENDITURE)

      Net income/(expenditure)   is stated after charging/(crediting):

                                                                                              2023              2022
                                                                                                I                    I
      Depreciation - owned assets                                                               2, 060            1,664
      Patents and licences amortisation                                                            398                   338
      Development costs amortisation                                                               522                   522


10.   TRUSTEES' REMUNERATION AND BENEFITS

      There were no trustees' remuneration     or other benefits for the year ended 30 )une 2023 nor for the year ended
      30 )une 2022.

      Trustees' expenses

      There were no trustees' expenses paid for the year ended 30 3une 2023 nor for the year ended 30 )une 2022.

11.   STAFF COSTS

                                                                                         2023                  2022
                                                                                          I                      I
      Wages and salaries                                                                 226, 883               125,422
      Social security costs                                                               20, 358                10,736
      Pension costs                                                                       13,170                  9,391
      Compensation for loss of office                                                     18,000

                                                                                         278,411                145,549


      The average monthly number of employees during the year was as follows:

                                                                                              2023               2022
      Management    and Administration                                                               5               3


      The number of employees whose employee benefits (excluding employer pension costs) exceeded 160,000 was:

                                                                                              2023               2022
      670, 001 - 680,000                                                                                             1
      I 150,001 - 6160,000


      Key management     compensation     for the year was 6168,925 (2022 696,099).

      During the year the charity made a payment of 618,000 (2022 Enil) for compensation            for loss of office. This
      payment was approved by the Chair with unanimous support from the board of Trustees.




                                                            -21-
AUTISM CENTRE OF EXCELLENCE

NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - continued
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 3UNE 2023



12.   COMPARATIVES FOR THE STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL ACTIVITIES
                                                         Unrestricted     Restdicted     Total
                                                             fund           funds        funds
                                                              E               E               E
      INCOME AND ENDOWMENTS FROM
      Donations and legacies                               897,735                      897,735

      Other trading activities                              13,440                        13,440

      Total                                                911,175                      911,175


      EXPENDITURE ON
      Charitable activities
      Support and improve the lives of autistic
      people                                               246, 179        333,333       579, 512


      NET INCOME/(EXPENDITURE)                             664, 996       (333,333)      331,663


      RECONCILIATION OF FUNDS
      Total funds brought forward                        1,032,025       1,000,000     2, 032, 025


      TOTAL FUNDS CARRIED FORWARD                        1,697, 021        666,667     2,363,688


13.   INDEPENDENT EXAMINATION

      The independent     examiner's fee consisted of:

                                                                           2023        2022
                                                                            E.           E
      Independent examination                                               1,000       1,000
      Preparation of statutory financial statements                         1,000       1,000
                                                                            2,000       2,000


14.   INTANGIBLE FIXED ASSETS
                                                          Patents
                                                             and        Development
                                                          licences         costs        Totals
                                                             E               E               E
      COST
      At 1 July 2022 and 30 June 2023                        2, 621         2, 133           4, 754

      AMORTISATION
      At 1 July 2022                                             348             565             913
      Charge for year                                            398             522             920

      At 30 June   2023                                          746        1,087            1,833

      NET BOOK VALUE
      At 30 June 2023                                        1,875           1,046           2,921

      At 30 June   2022                                      2, 273          1,568           3,841
AUTISM CENTRE OF EXCELLENCE

NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - continued
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 3UNE 2023



15.   TANGIBLE FIXED ASSETS
                                                                                  Computer
                                                                                  equipment
                                                                                      E
      COST
      At 1 3uly 2022                                                                 5, 108
      Additions                                                                      1,444

      At 30 june 2023                                                                6, 552

      DEPRECIATION
      At 1 july 2022                                                                 1,796
      Charge for year                                                                2, 060

      At 30 june 2023                                                                3,856

      NET BOOK VALUE
      At 30 june 2023                                                                2, 696

      At 30 june    2022                                                             3 312


16.   DEBTORS: AMOUNTS FALLING DUE WITHIN ONE YEAR
                                                                        2023         2022
                                                                         E            E
      Trade debtors                                                       427
      Other debtors                                                     11,813
      Prepayments                                                        1,712        1,422

                                                                        13,952        1,422


17.   CREDITORS: AMOUNTS FALLING DUE WITHIN ONE YEAR
                                                                        2023         2022
                                                                         E            E
      Trade creditors                                                    4, 661       4, 275
      Social security and other taxes                                   29,075        3,648
      Other creditors                                                    2, 090          509
      Accruals and deferred income                                       4, 800       4, 620

                                                                        40, 626      13,052


18.   MOVEMENT IN FUNDS
                                                                          Net
                                                                      movement        At
                                                         At 1/7/22     in funds    30/6/23
                                                             E            E            E
      Unrestricted funds
      General fund                                       1,697,021     295,627    1,992,648

      Restricted funds
      The 3ohn Lambton Trust - Research Project           666,667     (219,252)     447, 415


      TOTAL FUNDS                                        2, 363,688     76,375    2,440, 063




                                                  -23-
AUTISM CENTRE OF EXCELLENCE

NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - continued
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 3UNE 2023



18.   MOVEMENT IN FUNDS - continued

      Net movement       in funds,   included in the above are as follows:

                                                                             Incoming          Resources    Movement
                                                                             resources         expended      in funds
                                                                                  f               E             f
      Unrestricted       funds
      General fund                                                            772, 046         (476,419)      295,627

      Restricted funds
      The 3ohn Lambton Trust - Research Project                                114,081         (333,333)     (219,252)


      TOTAL FUNDS                                                              886, 127        (809,752)       76, 375



      Comparatives for movement in funds

                                                                                                   Net
                                                                                               movement         At
                                                                             At 1/7/21          in funds     30/6/22
                                                                                  E                f             f
      Unrestricted funds
      General fund                                                           1,032, 025         664, 996    1,697, 021

      Restricted funds
      The 3ohn Lambton Trust - Research Project                              1,000, 000        (333,333)      666, 667


      TOTALFUNDS                                                             2, 032, 025        331,663     2, 363,688


      Comparative    net movement in funds, included in the above are as follows:

                                                                              Incoming         Resources    Movement
                                                                              resources        expended      in funds
                                                                                  f                f             f
      Unrestricted       funds
      General fund                                                             911,175         (246, 179)     664, 996

      Restricted funds
      The 3ohn Lambton Trust - Research Project                                                (333,333)     (333,333)


      TOTAL FUNDS                                                              911,175         (579,512)      331,663


      Restricted Funds

      3 hn    m      n           R     rch Preset

      Restricted funding for the research of music therapy for autistic children and adults.




                                                               -24-
AUTISM CENTRE OF EXCELLENCE

NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - continued
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 IUNE 2023



19.   OTHER FINANCIAL COMMITMENTS

      The charity is committed to making more future grant payments to The Autism Research Centre.
                                                                                                            30/6/2024
                                                                                                               f
      Grant - music therapy project                                                                           333,333


20.   RELATED PARTY DISCLOSURES

      (i) Mark Hardie

      During the year, the charity was charged      consultancy   fees of 62,975 (2022 Inil) from Mark Hardie      Associates
      Limited.

      Mark is a consultant with significant experience in sports and physical inclusion     programs,   who was engaged        to
      develop an autism-inclusive cycling program aimed at enhancing wellbeing.

      Mark, the brother   of Fraser Hardie, Chairman of ACE, was selected to lead this initiative.

      Mark's selection, work scope, and compensation were overseen by the Director of Workstreams          and approved        by
      the CED, ensuring transparency and compliance with governance standards.

      (ii) Simon Baron-Cohen

      During the year, the charity made grants to the Autism Research Centre          of f333,333 (2022 6333,333) — music
      therapy research grant and 652, 106 (2022 anil) grant writer award.

      Professor Simon Baron-Cohen is a trustee of the chadity and a director of the Autism Research Centre.

      Simon does not participate in any decision making or voting on grant awards from the charity.

      (iii) Teneo

      During the year, the charity worked with Teneo, who provided pro bono assistance from their Strategy and
      Communications division. The value of the support has been reliably estimated to be 112,500 and is included in
      donations.

      The support has been in time and expertise, where Teneo campaigned            and assisted the launch of the      charity's
      suicide prevention programme.

      Fraser Hardie is a Senior Adviser to Teneo and formerly Chairman of Teneo UK. Fraser is also Chairman of ACE.

21.   POST BALANCE SHEET EVENTS

      After the year end the charity made a grant payment          of F568,322 for a suicide prevention     project with      the
      University of Cambridge.




                                                           -25-
AUTISM CENTRE OF EXCELLENCE

NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - continued
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 IUNE 2023



22.   COMPANY LIMITED BY GUARANTEE

      The charity is limited by guarantee and has no share capital. The liability of each member is determined   by the
      Articles of the charity and shall not exceed Il.




                                                        -26-
