                                             18/11/2023




Self
Evaluation
Report
  Agreed




Drake Primary School
URN: 120995


Drake Primary School                            18/11/2023
                                      Private & Confidential

                       Page 1 of 21
School Context
BRIEF SUMMARY

Drake Primary (NOR 420) was an infant school for 37 years, has now grown to a primary phase maintained school with an
Autism Specialist Resource Base.
September 2019 we welcomed our rst Year 6 class. A new leadership team and headteacher. September 2020 the leadership
team grew with the addition of a new Assistant Head Teacher. September 2022 the leadership team consisted of the Head
Teacher and the two Deputy Heads, (promotion of the Assistant Heads) along with the SENDCO. In January 2023, Drake
Primary entered into a partnership with another school in order to support their improvement. This involved a further
restructure of the leadership team.
September 2023, new members joined the leadership team following a very successful recruitment process. The new and
current leadership team consists of Executive Head Teacher, Head of School, Deputy Head, SENDCO, and two Assistant
Head Teachers. The SRB Lead also has a signi cant role in school.
Age range: 4 - 11 (with onsite nursery non LA)
Total pupils: 420
SRB pupils: 13 - growing to 16.
Pupil Premium: 73 - 17.4%
SEND total: 66 - 15.7%
SEND EHCP: 27 - 6.4%
EAL: 112 - 26.7%
LAC:3 - 0.71% (Post LAC 8 - 1.9%)
Forces: 17 - 4.1%
Young Carers: 7 - 1.7% (a further 24 children have been identi ed as young carers but parents have not engaged - total school
young carers 31 - 7.4%)
Attendance is 96.46%, which is above National (93.9%)
Persistent absence 7.1%. Attendance is monitored closely by the pastoral team and Parent Support Advisor who works directly
with families. Some current families with persistent absence are due to family circumstances and/or medical/SEND needs.
Data correct on 8/11/2023
Indices of deprivation show the school serves a community of families who are in the lowest 10% for Education, skills and
training and in the lowest 40% across the Multiple Indices of Deprivation. Our community is made up from a wide range of
families from di erent cultures and faith back grounds. A large group of Polish, Russian and Lithuanian pupils as well as
Portuguese families attend our school and use the day care. We have in the last year received three child refugees from
Ukraine.
Drake Primary was inspected by OFSTED in November 2021 and was graded Good in all areas.
In recent years, Drake Primary has seen signi cant capital programmes for the build of our new SRB for ASD and re-assigning
the use of the existing classrooms and spaces and the infra-structure to enhance the learning opportunities for all children.
Whilst reaching its conclusion in 2022/23, this has been a signi cant project and has caused some limitations, particularly in
regards to space and capacity around school and for the Reception classes who moved to a new building mid year.
In addition to this challenge, leaders still endeavoured to address concerns and priorities identi ed in 2018/19 and have also
been navigating the opening of schools post-pandemic and ensuring that a recovery curriculum focussed on identifying gaps in
skills and knowledge and prioritising those most necessary for progression and transition. Whilst understanding the priorities

Drake Primary School                                                                                              18/11/2023
                                                                                                      Private & Confidential

                                                         Page 2 of 21
regarding core subjects, we also recognised the signi cant loss of experiences and opportunities during this time and felt it
essential to prioritise the social and emotional wellbeing of children. We continued to develop our curriculum to o er a wide
range of opportunities and experiences for children including trips and visitors, art and music. Subject leaders used time
allocated to develop progression maps and planning formats and used national frameworks to structure school improvement.
As a result we have been awarded
Quality Mark for English and Maths
Platinum Artsmark – the only primary school in Norfolk to receive this at the time it was awarded.
Primary Science Quality mark
Games Marks Silver
Eco-Schools
Forest Schools
We are currently working towards the Autism Accreditation and have registered for the Artsmark renewal in 2 years time.




Drake Primary School                                                                                            18/11/2023
                                                                                                     Private & Confidential

                                                         Page 3 of 21
Quality of Education
JUDGEMENT


     Outstanding                                            Requires
                                    Good                                             Inadequate                  No Grade
                                                          Improvement
           ✓

Leaders, including governors are committed to ensuring that all pupils, particularly disadvantaged pupils and including pupils
with SEND, make good progress. The school's Mission Vision and Aims, has been critical in the curriculum design and our
ambitions for the children. In all aspects of school life, children's wellbeing and strong education built on a wide variety of
experiences to ensure breadth and depth is evident in order to create the foundations for their futures.
Over the course of study, teaching is designed to help pupils to remember long term the content they have been taught and to
integrate new knowledge into larger ideas. Our curriculum design includes themes rather than topics as this broader approach
to curriculum ensures that children are encouraged to make better links between their curriculum subjects and also their own
experiences and lives. Pupils’ aspirations are a high priority at Drake as an area of disadvantage and a history of low aspiration.
Our curriculum aims to inspire and to help children discover their interests and passions so that they consider themselves
lifelong learners. Developing life skills and equipping children to navigate their world including digital and online platforms
supports our ambitions for our curriculum over the coming years. We introduce a range of inspirational people to the children
and explore our school values re ected in all aspects of life. Our class names re ect this well along with other inspirational and
signi cant people (past and present) within our curriculum. Our inclusive ethos ensures that inspirational people include
representations of our school community, including those with SEND. When naming an SRB class after Jason Arday, he came to
visit, meeting the children and delivering an inspiration speech to parents of children with SEND or having a place in the SRB.
Subject related planning, devised by leaders with specialists has resulted in a move away from bought in schemes in most
areas. This enables pupils to learn their theme in a relevant context they have the opportunities to see the connections
between aspects of their learning in relation to the context of the school and our pupils and the wider world. With wide
reaching concepts and thought provoking key questions, our curriculum is accessible for all pupils including those with SEND.
The majority of children who attend the SRB access their mainstream classes well and have individual timetables and support.
Strategies are explicitly taught to support them to regulate and navigate the social and academic aspects of school life. These
strategies, such as the zones of regulation are shared across school for us in all classrooms with all children. Other SEND
strategies are also supported by the specialist team. Our subject leaders provide materials and resources to support CPD and
subject knowledge and investigate frameworks which promote best practice. For example, we have been accredited Platinum
Artsmark, Silver Games Mark, English and Maths Quality Mark, Primary Science Quality Mark. Teachers and support sta
understand how these frameworks can be used to ensure that the school remains innovative, supported by current research
and best practice and always striving for the best outcomes for children.
The Curriculum development is well underway, the whole school community are ambitious about what we can still achieve to
further close the disadvantage gaps in our community.
SLT have undertaken book looks, lesson observations and Assistant Heads review medium term planning and sequences of
learning. Subject leaders are beginning to review planning more e ectively and monitor progress across school according to
their 100 day subject action plans. SLT review teacher performance together and understand strengths and weaknesses of
teaching across school. SLT undertake performance management meetings to ensure that teachers are set targets in line with
their career development and their current teaching practice. As a result teachers receive feedback regarding their practice
frequently so that a drop in performance does not have long term e ects on the quality of education.
Balancing the high expectations for all areas of the curriculum is sometimes challenging but sta are committed to this
outcome for children and understand the importance of a broad and balanced curriculum enriched with a wide range of
opportunities, particularly for the demographics of Drake Primary. Subject leaders are being given time to track progression
across year groups and regular monitoring is helping teachers ensure quality of planning and teaching. The use of planning
sequences has evolved over the past three years and is now better supporting teaching across subjects. Re ning this remains
a focus for SLT and subject leads. Coverage and breadth of the curriculum is evidenced on the school website and is reviewed
in conjunction with other monitoring. Using a continuous provision approach in year 1 allows the children to practice and


Drake Primary School                                                                                                 18/11/2023
                                                                                                         Private & Confidential

                                                          Page 4 of 21
apply their learning and skills, capturing this learning in books develops across the year. Practical evidence on the school
website, and looking at progression between pieces of work, particularly in writing demonstrates the impact of teaching.
Drake has an ambition for all children to be able to read and for end of year results to exceed National averages. A recent
change to the assessment of core subjects aims to ensure that children are able to apply their understanding in a full range of
contexts. Assessment of other subjects is supported by subject leads. The school uses Pupil Asset to track all pupils from EYFS,
KS1, KS2 and yearly starting points and to provide data reports analysing the attainment and progress of children including
vulnerable groups. Termly summative assessments in English, Maths and Science are used to and provide opportunities for
question level analysis which informs planning. The robust use of summative assessment is a key priority of school. Termly
pupil progress meetings in year groups analyse performance data and assessment and agree actions for pupils who are not
making expected progress. Pupil's welfare, behaviour and attendance is also tracked at weekly pastoral team meetings and
this data/discussion is shared with class teachers to check on its e ect on learning, if any, particularly for vulnerable groups.
Curriculum design is very intentional to allow for deep exploration of themes which build on prior learning. Leaders are able to
discuss the intent of the curriculum and how this will develop over time to include more links to the wider world, world of work
and life skills. Subject leads regularly review their subjects and complete 100 day plans to focus on a key focus which allows
them to plan the development or monitoring.
Subject leads deliver CPD sessions and updates and regularly communicate via email to ensure that sta are able to revisit key
messages. Leaders know and understand the context of the school and the ambition to provide a wide range of experiences
and opportunities to enhance the lives of children and enable them to make secure connections between their learning and
their experiences which in turn supports conceptual understanding of the curriculum. Leaders know that coverage of the
National Curriculum is a minimum requirement and that the ambition at Drake is to exceed the National Curriculum with our
o er. For example all children go swimming every year for 5 - 10 sessions depending on year group. Our arts provision and
cultural capital opportunities are of an exceptional standard and as a result we achieved the Platinum Artsmark in 2023.
Computing at Drake follows a scheme which supports skill development and this year we are working on use and application
across subjects. However, in addition to this, lunch time and after school opportunities allow the children to learn advanced
coding and children use Python which is beyond the expectation for Primary school.
The sequence and design of the curriculum has been carefully constructed. the theme approach rather than topics allows for
exploration of key questions which can build on prior knowledge and experiences. We have continued to re ne the curriculum,
this year adding Lyfta as a resources to learn about the wider world. The curriculum is still in early stages of implementation
due to a focus on the recovery curriculum and wellbeing following school closures due to Covid.
The school has recently federated and as such, has a new Governing Body who are revisiting the MVA of the Federation. In line
with this, a review of the school MVA will take place. Currently leaders are planning the inclusion of sustainability and a digital
world along with life skills and the world of work as we respond to the needs of the local community to continue to raise
aspirations. Summer Term 2023 will see a review of the curriculum and preparations ready for re nements in September 2024
as we continue to make sure that the curriculum is relevant for the pupil community.
Over the course of study, teaching is designed to help pupils to remember long term the content they have been taught and to
integrate new knowledge into larger ideas.
SLT meet weekly and curriculum is a standing agenda item. Monitoring and discussions ensure that all leaders understand the
focus for development and key priorities for individual subjects and the school. Subject leads are given time to develop and
monitor their subjects and are invited to SLT meetings to discuss their subjects. Mid year reviews allow for the discussion of
100 day plans, successes, challenges and next steps for improvement or development opportunities. Our engagement in CPD,
work with external consultants and ongoing projects, keep our curriculum relevant, contextual and in line with best practice.
SLT shared observation of lessons for performance management and understand strengths and weaknesses of teaching
across school. SLT and subject leads have undertaken book looks and AH review MTPs. Subject leaders are continue to review
progress across school in their areas and have developed subject action plans. Data reports are generated for Maths, Reading,
science and Phonics termly and other curriculum leads create reports for Governors throughout the year.
Currently leaders are planning the inclusion of sustainability and a digital world along with life skills and the world of work as
we respond to the needs of the local community to continue to raise aspirations. Summer Term 2024 is our annual overall
review of the curriculum and preparations ready for re nements in September 2024 as we continue to create a curriculum is
relevant for the pupil community.
The curriculum o er at Drake is exceptional and in no way narrows the curriculum. With a strong investment in the arts, sports
and cultural experiences, all sta understand the high ambitions for the children at school and the need for enrichment and

Drake Primary School                                                                                                  18/11/2023
                                                                                                          Private & Confidential

                                                           Page 5 of 21
wide opportunities. Timetables and website evidence capture the range of opportunities and learning provided including
cultural capital opportunities. Drake pursues the goal of providing and education beyond the National Curriculum and believe
that these opportunities must be accessible by all children. This is why all children, over the course of their education will have
opportunities to learn from musicians and play an instrument, not only those who can a ord additional lessons. all children go
swimming, have forest school, engage in projects outside of school and attend trips and visits. whole school events widen
these opportunities further engaging not only with their class but with their community.
Planning and book scrutiny ensure that the curriculum is suitable sequenced and allows for the acquisition of skills and
knowledge over time. Leaders understand the challenges faced by teachers when striving to provide such an ambitious
curriculum and appreciate the e orts and dedication required for e ective implementation. When challenges are faced, sta
are supported and sometimes leaders mitigate with strategies that support workload and coverage without reducing the
overall ambition.
The ongoing assessment of curriculum coverage and connections between areas of learning are an area of focus for leaders.
Work in books, for some subjects, does not fully capture the learning that has taken place and where this is identi ed, sta are
being supported.
The broad and ambitious curriculum ensures that during any week, children are exposed to a wide variety of learning
opportunities. Challenge and pitch ensures that children are producing work of the expected quality in most lessons.
Productivity in subjects such as maths have improved signi cantly whereas in some other subjects this is still developing.
However, over time, children are able to demonstrate their learning in di erent ways. For example, by creating a podcast for
the radio, demonstrating skills to other teachers.
Children with SEND are supported to achieve. Some children working signi cantly below expectation follow the Norfolk
Assessment Pathway Curriculum completing this work and then engaging in other more self directed tasks which support
independence, ne motor skills, perseverance or other skills related to their individual plans. Bespoke timetables are also in
place for the children in the SRB with a blend of academic learning and social, emotional, communication and interaction
support according to individual targets.
Teachers are expected to use formative assessment within lessons to support the learning of pupils. In the moment feedback
is expected rather than marking books after the lessons have nished to enable the children to respond to feedback
immediately. This skill is developing. In some lessons, teachers do not intervene quickly enough to prevent a misconception
being repeated or move learning on challenging pupils appropriately. In some lessons this can be addressed well with
visualiser stops so that feedback is given to the whole class.
Termly summative assessments are used to ascertain progress and attainment. Teachers are encouraged to consider point in
time assessment. However, more focus on application evidence is now required to form the teacher assessment including the
summative assessments for Maths, English and Science. QLA is completed once assessments are marked and this information
is used to inform planning.
EY and KS1 results are consistent with the Drake expectations of pupils. GLD and Phonics data consistently exceed National
averages over the last 5 years. In Year 2, results are in line with expectations.
Whilst rapidly improving end of KS2 results do not yet re ect the educational o er of the school. Actions for this year will
address this area of concern to ensure that pupils' knowledge and skills across the curriculum is accurately re ected in results
in year 6 from national tests and examinations that meet government expectations.
Drake works with external consultants to ensure that literacy and numeracy development is in line with best practice. These
skills are taught within the core subject lessons and school explore ways to make more use of these across the curriculum. For
example the work in maths surrounding statistics supports longitudinal projects in science which can be presented through
spreadsheets and graphs in computing. For this purpose, we have redeployed subject leadership into a teamed approach as
STEM.
English skills are also maximised throughout the curriculum and now that our Talk4Writing and Talk4Reading programmes are
better established, teachers are planning to build on the children's learning from the Autumn Term to consolidate skills in the
Spring and Summer - for example year 2 will be able to create instructions for a curriculum purpose once they have learned
the skills and toolkits in English. Reading longer texts related to curriculum knowledge is a piece of work planned to be
undertaken by the English lead and subject leads.
School uses Pupil Asset to track all pupils from EYFS, KS1, KS2 and yearly starting points and to answer questions about any
groups or individuals. Pupils are given termly summative (linked to PIT) assessments based on their year group objectives, as

Drake Primary School                                                                                                 18/11/2023
                                                                                                         Private & Confidential

                                                          Page 6 of 21
well as formative and summative assessments. Termly pupil progress meetings in year groups analyse performance data and
assessment and agree actions for pupils who are not making expected progress. Pupil's welfare, behaviour and attendance is
also tracked at weekly pastoral team meetings and this data/discussion is shared with class teachers to check on its impact on
learning, if any, particularly for vulnerable groups.
Pupil progress is strong and the evidence for this continues to build as the assessment process is re ned and becomes more
accurate increasing the validity of progress over time. Current year 6 test data con rms the work or leaders to secure
improving outcomes is successful. All leaders are fully engaged in working with any groups of children who may not meet
expected year end outcomes.
Strengths
     Pupils study a full, enriching and aspirational curriculum
     Regular SLT discussion and sharing of information ensures that focus areas are identi ed and support strategies are
     agreed and put in place.
     Leadership is highly e ective in closing gaps including for those children who are disadvantaged or SEND
     Reading is prioritised to allow pupils to access the full curriculum o er
     The school's curriculum intent and implement are embedded throughout the school
Opportunities for development
     Outcomes at the end of key stage 2 continue to improve
     The most disadvantaged pupils and those with SEND achieve exceptionally well
     Across the school, series of lessons continue to deepen understanding across subject areas
     Re ning the use of planning sequences




Drake Primary School                                                                                              18/11/2023
                                                                                                      Private & Confidential

                                                        Page 7 of 21
Behaviour and Attitudes
JUDGEMENT


     Outstanding                                           Requires
                                   Good                                             Inadequate                  No Grade
                                                         Improvement
           ✓

The school has high expectations for pupils; behaviour and conduct in the majority of classes is strong. These expectations are
commonly understood and applied consistently and fairly. This is re ected in pupils’ positive behaviour and conduct. Low-level
disruption is generally not tolerated and pupils’ behaviour does not disrupt lessons or the day-to-day life of the school. Sta
are well supported by leaders and the pastoral team in managing pupil behaviour. Sta make sure that pupils follow
appropriate routines when following the behaviour policy. Pupils attitudes to their education are positive. They are developing
commitment to their learning, and learning how to study e ectively and take pride in their achievements. Relationships among
pupils and sta re ect a positive and respectful culture. Pupils are safe and they feel safe. Our signi cant pastoral team works
closely together, with children, families and external agencies to meet the needs of the children. The specialism within the
team ensures a wide perspective and helps navigate which support is most appropriate, for example EAL, family, behaviour,
SEMH or SEND.
Through the establishment of positive relationships underpinned by our school values, Drake has a culture of respect and
support. This results in children being keen to behave and support others. Children know the school rules well and are able to
adhere to them, challenging themselves to take on responsibility and accountability for their behaviour. For example, the radio
council often work unsupervised in the media room carrying out their role and responsibilities. They do this not for fear of
sanction or to seek reward but because they value the process and the independence and responsibility bestowed upon them.
Classes are calm and productive yet lled with an excitement and eagerness to learn and undertake tasks and activities. Talk
partner and group work encourages collaboration and negotiation between pupils as well as con ict resolution on occasions.
Our behaviour policy is followed by sta and strategies are consistently applied. A few children in school have a di erentiated
approach, these children have a Individual Risk Management plan or Pastoral Support Plan known by sta . Behaviour at break
times has improved with the inclusion of more structured opportunities, especially during lunch time. The pastoral team, who
discuss vulnerable children and those displaying patterns of behaviour monitor children at di erent times throughout the day
as well as during break times to support planning to meet individuals' needs.
Attendance at Drake is above National and this is supported through the children's enjoyment of school and pupil
engagement. SLT and the pastoral team work closely together to monitor attendance and strategize to support individual
children ad families. The Parent Support Advisor works very closely with families and also the attendance team to o er
bespoke support and guidance.
Attendance is celebrated weekly in assembly and children are well motivated to attend. The winning class is reported in the
weekly newsletter along with whole school weekly attendance. The vast majority of families understand the importance of
regular attendance. Parents understand the procedure for requesting leave and that holidays are not authorised during term
time. Punctuality is also monitored and the PSA works with families regarding this. Families are discussed in pastoral meetings
and strategies are put in place.
Pupils value their education, most absence is parental request. Pupils have high attendance, come to school on time and are
punctual to lessons. When this is not the case, the school takes appropriate, swift and e ective action. The Pastoral Team
meets weekly and analyses the attendance data looking at trends and repeated absence children. First letters are sent to
parents when a child falls below the 95% attendance and the school’s PSA meets with parents to discuss the reasons for poor
attendance and how as a school we can make improvements. The main group of children with attendance issues is KS2 SEND.
Persistent absence of a child who is awaiting another school placement has a ected this signi cantly
Leaders, sta and pupils create a positive environment in which bullying is not tolerated. If bullying, aggression, discrimination
and derogatory language occur, they are dealt with quickly and e ectively and are not allowed to spread. Pupils are safe and
feel safe they know their voice is heard when we investigate any incidents and collect voice from all children involved. They
have opportunities to learn how to keep themselves safe and how to prevent misuse of technology. Leaders provide good


Drake Primary School                                                                                                18/11/2023
                                                                                                        Private & Confidential

                                                         Page 8 of 21
information and respond appropriately to concerns. Pupils repeatedly report their positive experiences of school but do
acknowledge that at times, children can be unkind to others. Children feel that teachers respond to these situations to keep
children safe.
Children are taught explicitly about safeguarding themselves and how to share concerns if something happens in school, out
of school or online. The RSHE curriculum and computing curriculum directly target these issues and they are further explored
through our school values and personal safety aspects of worship. Development of the RSHE curriculum to include cross
school strategies including the zones of regulation will enhance this further.
The pastoral team monitor behaviour closely and where there are issues of repeated behaviours, action plans are created to
respond in partnership with teachers and families. The team work with other agencies to seek support, particularly if a child is
receiving xed term exclusions.
Where there are issues, sta respond appropriately and quickly. On occasions, when children have exhibited persistent
challenging behaviours, these are monitored and dealt with. Other children are supported to be understanding and
relationship support through RSHE sessions are conducted.
The school’s approach to xed term exclusion is related closely to our behaviour policy and pathway. Exclusions may be issued
as a result of serious or persistent behaviours. In each instance, communication and partnership with parents is established as
far as possible. Reintegration meetings make expectations clear to pupils and parents and agreements of strategies to be in
place support the child to be successful. Where children might become a risk of permanent exclusion, partnership with
parents and external agencies would ensure that this is a last resort.
In order to prevent permanent exclusion, SLT have worked with families to improve behaviours through a pastoral support
plan, engaged with the local authority to provide suitable alternative provision or movement to complex needs school and
explored the managed move process. Permanent exclusions are used appropriately as a last resort in consultation with
families and external agencies. In all instances, the best interests of the child remain at the centre of practice and decision
making alongside the wellbeing of the other pupils in school. At all stages, our approach remains child focused and solution
based.
Strengths
     The school has high expectations for pupils’ behaviour and conduct. These expectations are commonly understood and
     applied consistently and fairly
     The excellent relationships among pupils and sta re ect a positive and respectful culture; pupils are safe and they feel
     safe
     Pupils' consistent positive attitudes and commitment to their education demonstrates that they are highly motivated and
     persistent in the face of di culties. Pupils make highly positive, tangible contribution to the life of the school and/or the
     wider community. Pupils actively support the well-being of other pupils
     Pupils behave consistently well, with high levels of self-control and positive attitudes. Highly e ective action to support
     them to succeed in their education where children nd this more challenging in collaboration with external agencies and
     professionals
Opportunities for development
     Sta continue to develop their understanding of what a di erentiated pathway looks like and why it is sometimes
     necessary. This will include the continued training and development for SEND/SEMH/Trauma informed best practice
     Development of the RSHE curriculum to include the zones of regulation




Drake Primary School                                                                                                 18/11/2023
                                                                                                         Private & Confidential

                                                          Page 9 of 21
Personal Development
JUDGEMENT


     Outstanding                                           Requires
                                   Good                                              Inadequate                 No Grade
                                                         Improvement
           ✓

Throughout the wide range of opportunities and experiences that is provided for the pupils at Drake, they are supported to
develop their individuality, character and personalities whilst understanding their own responsibilities to support their
personal development. Our positive relationships with the children support them to navigate the world around them,
exploring risks and challenges and developing the resourcefulness, resilience and independence required for them to excel.
They understand risks within the real, and digital worlds and are encouraged to understand and appreciate that their own
experience, viewpoint and lifestyle will di er to others, within school, the local community and the world. Through this they
develop tolerance and acceptance and have respect for others from a range of backgrounds and abilities and for those with
interests and beliefs that di er to their own.
Our curriculum, including enhanced experiences and opportunities support the development of well-rounded, responsible,
and engaged members of the school and community. Children are given responsibility and are held to account for this. For
example, our radio council broadcast daily at lunch time and are expected to be on time, understand their role and the
expectations and to implement these often without the direct input and support of a teacher. Children are actively encouraged
to share their views and support leadership to shape their school. A blue-sky activity with school council allowed them the
opportunity to share their successes and visions for school development. Eco-council have worked diligently to share
information about the environment and the role of the school and community. They have clear targets which support their
projects against which they can evaluate their own impact. Across school, more than a quarter of the pupils are within a school
council and all pupil groups are represented.
Our school values, encompassing British values, are at the heart of all we do at Drake and then are embedded within our
curriculum and processes. For example, individual liberty and democracy through our pupil councils and election processes,
our focus on courageous advocacy and social justice underpin our school value of Courage and Trust. Understanding,
tolerance and acceptance are the foundation of our values and are taught through values days, RE, RSHE, and through
religions, faith and other protective characteristics being explored throughout our curriculum including challenging and
though provoking key questions and concepts. Our classes and rooms are named after a diverse range of inspirational people
and they are used as role models who have shaped our history and our future. The rule of law is supported through designed
discussions and understanding of right and wrong and these discussions progress throughout school in a range of subjects
including English, history, RE and RSHE. From early on, children are earning about their rights and their responsibilities within
school and their communities.
Our school values underpin our learning and this relates to understanding of the school rules and expectations. The children
know and follow these well. They explore what rules might mean in various contexts to ensure that they not only follow rules
because they are in place but because the children know right from wrong and can act with integrity. They are able to hold
themselves to the highest standard, for example listening to and following instructions as a rule could be interpreted further
by the understanding of the responsibility to fully understand the instruction and to be resourceful and accountable when
following it to the best of our ability. Our RSHE curriculum and collective worship allows the exploration of some complex
issues and through this, sta are able to support discussions about contextual safeguarding so that children understand the
threats and risks within their community and are supported to navigate them.


The school behaviour policy is understood well by sta and is used to support positive learning behaviours. Behaviour logs are
monitored and regulated by the pastoral team and the Lead Behaviour Professional supports teachers with serious incident
letters and communications with parents. Where behaviours are serious or persistent, processes such as a pastoral support
plan are initiated. Close work with the Local Authority ensures that provisions are in place for children and sanctions are
applied appropriately.
All sta receive annual training on Safeguarding and Prevent. They are aware of the indicators of radicalisation. The pastoral
team in collaboration with a range of external agencies to support and monitor families including Inclusion Team, Attendance

Drake Primary School                                                                                                18/11/2023
                                                                                                        Private & Confidential

                                                         Page 10 of 21
Team, Mental Health Team, Young Carers Team to monitor and support our most vulnerable pupils when identi ed and as
necessary liaise with safeguarding professionals and the police. We have a number of sta DSL trained to ensure the highest
level of vigilance and understanding in school and a dedicated DSL team. Our safeguarding Governor understands policy and
practice and all Governors complete their own training annually.
Children are regularly taught about appropriate behaviour and how to navigate relationships through our Early Years PSED
and our RSHE scheme, ensuring that this is accessible to all using tools such as social stories to convey the key messages. This
includes an understanding of bullying and what to do if bullying is experienced or witnesses. Anti-bullying week allows for
coverage of these issues. Work is often undertaken to help children understand what constitutes bullying. Accusations of
bullying are taken seriously, investigated and acted upon.
Online safety is taught half termly with aspects of teaching being directed by assessments undertaken by the children to
ensure that the most prevalent issues are dealt with and positive messages are reinforced. Parent cafes in 2022/23 have been
online safety focussed with this being the planned theme of Cafes in the Spring Term in 23/24. We understand the important
role that parents play in keeping their children safe but also the speed at which technology is posing risk and that some
families are less con dent understanding and addressing these. Information lea ets are shared in newsletters and available at
the school o ce/reception area. Where children access alternate or o site provision, we are in contact and complete the
necessary safeguarding checks.
Curriculum design includes opportunities and experiences which support children's mental health, physical, social and
emotional development as well as academic achievement and support classes to have shared experiences to create a sense of
belonging and community. For example, in September 2023, we had a whole school trip to High Lodge in Thetford Forest. We
have also engaged with the Mental Health Support Trust to provide workshops and support for children and regularly re ect
on aspects of mental health include sleep, healthy eating, physical exercise etc. Not only is the wellbeing of children important,
but also our sta who have received training which can support their own mental health and their ability to support children
and families. Many of our sta team, have chosen to undertake further training in this area. The zones of regulation strategy is
used across school to help children to recognise and manage their emotions including general and bespoke strategies they
can use to regulate. Our nurture groups and interventions such as forest school, ELSA, drawing and talking and Lego therapy
also support children with speci c challenges.
Drake children bene t from a daily run, regular PE slot, annual swimming, other sporting events across the year. Children are
reminded about the importance of health and tness for a healthy lifestyle. Our school kitchen has been awarded Silver Food
for Life which recognises our locally sourced and organic produce, healthy menu choices and promotion of healthy living. Our
SNAC team (School nutrition action committee) work on the promotion of healthy foods and cooking activities, this is in the
early stages of development and implementation.
Individuality and character are evidenced throughout the school, children are encouraged to be themselves and are supported
to navigate this through kindness and respect for others. This is also modelled by an eclectic sta team who are valued highly.
Children are o ered a wide range of opportunities and experiences across di erent curriculum areas in the aim for them to
  nd their interests and passions, whatever they may be. Once found, we encourage and promote this, supporting children to
have high aspirations and a strong work ethic through perseverance and resilience in order to achieve it. Our inspirational
people are highlighted throughout the children's education but they are encouraged to nd their own inspiration through
historical and current signi cant people including those known to them. Our afterschool clubs further give opportunities for
children to engage with something of their choosing with a wide range on o er including sports, science, chess, cheerleading,
book folding, art, choir, coding, craft, gardening and role play gaming. We ensure that sta run clubs that they are also
interested in, modelling the passion and enthusiasm for wider curriculum activities. Most of these are free to access and
delivered by teachers. Where external companies are used, there is a small charge to families. The pastoral team monitors
engagement of disadvantaged pupils to ensure that opportunities are accessible and they are being accessed, we do this by
ensuring our young carers group (which meets weekly) have an opportunity to similar access activities as we recognise that
after school opportunities were not a commonly accessed by this group of pupils.
Children share that they feel valued and liked and the positive relationships throughout school demonstrate this well. Children
play and socialise together positively and collaboratively and are supported if necessary when they have disagreements.
Children understand that they should treat everyone with kindness and respect even if they do not have shared interests.
Children are supported well in school to see and consider a range of possibilities for their lives. Through the curriculum, stories
and books, they are exposed to signi cant people related to particular careers or qualities. We endeavour to provide trips and
visitors which further inspire and help children to consider wider options for them as they progress through their lives, for
example we have been visited by authors, artists, scientists, historians, chefs, musicians, environmentalists and professors.


Drake Primary School                                                                                                 18/11/2023
                                                                                                         Private & Confidential

                                                         Page 11 of 21
As we continue to re ne our approach to the development of each child, our use of Lyfta as a learning platform further
illustrates themes, issues and lifestyles across the world. We have also registered for a careers related learning programme
which will enable us to work more closely with industries to educate and inform children about the workforce and challenge
stereotypical views.
Last year, we attended a careers event 'skills escalation day' for Year 2 children and this year Year 5 attended a manufacturing
day with a local business. In school, visiting opportunities and collaboration between settings also support the transition to the
next phase of their education. This year we have established a closer partnership with the local high school for opportunities
such as: SLT visiting our Year 7 pupils, Year 6 children attending a musical event and performances.
At Drake, our range of experiences is extensive and as far as possible supported by experts for quality assurance.
Trips and visits including residentials include:
     Whole school trip to high lodge with a range of curriculum and sporting opportunities
     museum visits
     library
     farms and sanctuaries
     churches
     experience days
     sporting events including skill development or competitions
     performance opportunities
     watching performances of others
     puppet theatre
     botanical gardens
     industry opportunities
     adventurous activity
     Travel to other counties/countries (France)
     Visitors include
     scientists
     environmentalists
     historians
     sports people (last year we had Lily Woodham visit)
     local musician workshops
     authors
     maths workshops
     visitors for collective worship
All pupils attend our trips and visits and the donations made are voluntary. Once payments are received, school calculates the
shortfall to determine the viability of the trip and where/how remaining costs can be covered by the school.
In addition, through our main curriculum we also provide a range of opportunities for art and music. Our involvement with the
Norfolk Music Hub and our musicians in residence ensure that our children receive music education of an extremely high
quality. All children at Drake learn to play an instrument and this culminates in UKS2 as they are able to choose an instrument
to learn for a year or two at no cost to the parents. Instruments are provided for the children so that they can practice at home
and support their skills development. Additional private lessons can also be paid for.
All children at Drake, throughout the year will also have opportunities to learn in our Forest School area and go swimming. Our
forest school provision is key in supporting wellbeing, independence and resilience as well as supporting our school curriculum
in line with the mission, vision and aims. It is an expectation that all sta at Drake have completed or will complete Level 1
training through the guidance of our skilled Forest School Lead who is an accredited trainer. This wider commitment to the
ethos of outdoor learning means that all sta share the vision for play based, holistic learning and understand the full value of
this type of learning. The children attend Forest school in all weathers and look forward to this part of their week.
Our school Head Boy and Head Girl, supported by the prefects, role model expectations throughout our school. They support
the celebration assembly weekly and are ambassadors for the school. This year, they have started to contribute to the weekly
newsletter for parents sharing their own observations of weekly events.
Each class has nominated peer mentors who was selected for their qualities and attributes for being a good role model and
supportive of others. Their role is to support others in school, particularly at break times, be a listening ear or someone to go
to if you are lonely, they support children who are new to the school and who nd making friends challenging.

Drake Primary School                                                                                                 18/11/2023
                                                                                                         Private & Confidential

                                                         Page 12 of 21
     Our councils include School (general), Eco, Sport, Tech, Radio, Art, Play, EAL, SNAC, Diversity, Sanctuary and Medical
     councils. These allow for children to follow their interests and engage within a pupil leadership role. They attend
     meetings to learn about the focus and agree plans for the year then work collaboratively to achieve them. This teaches
     the children about commitment and responsibility, accountability, sharing information with stakeholders, presentation
     skills and being ambassadors for the school. They are able to impact upon the school and pupils and make a di erence,
     for example:
     Eco council worked towards a target of reducing waste which resulted in a change of system for the disposal of food
     waste in school.
     Sports Council requested a change of PE kit to include a hoodie. They also wanted our school houses to be more clearly
     de ned. As a result, our PE kit is now the colour of their house and a PE Hoodie has been introduced. Sports Council also
     carried our fundraising and used some of the money to provide a PE shirt to every new reception child in September
     2023.
     Following a swimming gala, a new swim team has been introduced in school. the children have dedicated sessions to
     competitive skills and techniques and then some fun competition. They compete with other local schools
     Radio Council wanted to increase their listeners and now broadcast 'Live at Lunch' daily which is played outside for the
     children to enjoy. They have developed a system to allow for pupils to interact, send in ideas and answers that are then
     shared on the radio
     Peer mentors have created a buddy bench so that children have somewhere to go if they need support. They raised
     money to have a peer mentor hoodie so that they are able to be identi ed easily by the other children.
     E ective use is made of our sports premium money to cover additional sensory circuit sessions for pupils, sporting
     opportunities, competitive sports and swimming for Reception and key stage 1.
Strengths
     Our curriculum extends beyond academic skills
     We consistently promote the extensive personal development of pupils and go beyond the expected, so that pupils have
     access to a wide, rich set of experiences. Opportunities for pupils to develop their talents and interests are of exceptional
     quality. These are provided through the curriculum and through extra-curricular activities, and they considerably
     strengthen the school’s o er.
     Opportunities for children to develop a sense of responsibility through councils
     The value for individuals including their personality and character is excellent and radiates throughout the school
Opportunities for development
     The planning of experiences is mapped out across the year and balanced which supports planning and preparation
     Development of Lyfta and Careers Related Learning projects (as these are still in early stages).




Drake Primary School                                                                                                 18/11/2023
                                                                                                        Private & Confidential

                                                         Page 13 of 21
Leadership and Management
JUDGEMENT


     Outstanding                                            Requires
                                    Good                                             Inadequate                  No Grade
                                                          Improvement
           ✓

Leaders at Drake have the track record of demonstrating the capacity to support and challenge the sta at school to provide
the best outcomes for children, both at Drake and other schools. Leaders have a clear mission, vision and aims rooted in the
need for children in the locality to develop their aspirations and inspirations, the leadership team drive an inspiring and
experience rich education for children, helping them to discover and develop their passions and interests, develop a curiosity
in the world around them, consider opportunities and the need for social justice and courageous advocacy and to be prepared
for the modern, digital world. The robust recruitment of sta ensures that sta are value aligned and ambitious for high
quality outcomes and the school values of the school permeate through all we do. Sta are supported by clear rules and
guidance including the code of conduct and school charter and use these to be transparent, hold each other to account and
provide professional challenge. This is modelled and supported by leaders consistently. Subject leads are empowered to
undertake their own research, engage with professionals and make decisions about their subjects. SLT aims to develop local
decision makers and support the independence of subject leads whilst maintaining supportive monitoring and guidance.
Subject leads are released from teaching regularly to ensure that they are able to carry out their roles e ectively with most
having time on alternate weeks and some subjects receiving weekly time. Teachers feel supported and encouraged to ask for
additional time, resources and support that is needed for them to carry out their roles.
Regular SLT meetings include monitoring and feedback to sta to ensure that the highest expectations are centre to our
practice. Whilst understanding that some sta need direct support with aspects of their work, all school sta are expected to
strive for outstanding practice. This includes actively engaging in CPD and seeking out resources and opportunities to enhance
the practice of themselves and others thus impacting positively on outcomes for children. For example, the SRB specialists
support the implementation of a range of practices supporting all children and families in school, including those with SEND.
This has also helped sta to understand neurodivergence of pupils and families. In addition to the annual safeguarding
training and development required, a number of sta are currently undertaking National Professional Quali cations and this is
actively encouraged for those in role and those aspiring. The development and growth of the sta team is valued and the
professional development of sta is supported through the use of a career stage expectation, career pathway meetings using
a career progression document and targets set through performance management. Sta actively request CPD in relation to
their interests and needs and can access this through training, for example mental health champion training or enhanced
opportunities, for example a member of support sta expressed an interest in young carers and now runs young carer
sessions. We have also seen the development of our support sta training to be teachers and often retain trainees once
quali ed where vacancies are available. Where sta express an interest in leadership, opportunities are created appropriately
in line with the career development pathway. This has included enhanced responsibilities such as mentoring, involvement in
recruitment, leading networks, event management, curriculum development, budget monitoring, DSL training, training for
trainers CPD and secondments. School leaders themselves attend high quality training including NAHT CPD, NPQH, Leader's
conferences, New Head's Induction training, Church of England Leadership of Diversity and Inclusion to model the need for
ongoing development and training. We have been accepted as a host school for the Leaders Like Us programme starting in the
Spring for aspiring leaders needing mentors to increase diverse representations of leaders in education. Sta report that
Drake is a positive place to work, full of energy, ambition and professionalism and transforming the lives of children. Drake is
child centred and put the needs of the children at the heart of all we do and this motivation drives the practice of our sta . The
views of stakeholders are sought to ensure that the school meets the needs of the pupils and the community. Our longer
strategy is focused on providing inspiration to drive aspiration and ensure that children have the skills to be successful citizens
and contribute to the world of work.
The weekly sta CPD is mapped out for the year but then adapted and developed as the year progresses to ensure that
training and support is responsive to the needs of the school, pupils and sta . Both internal and external expertise is used to
quality assure aspects of the professional development o ered to sta subject leaders all have an active part in the
development of their subjects through CPD and monitoring both independently and within SLT meetings. We are currently
developing opportunities for formal and informal collaboration with pour partner school and other schools in the local area.
Drake supports the development of teachers in other schools, for example o ering art CPD and partnership projects,

Drake Primary School                                                                                                 18/11/2023
                                                                                                         Private & Confidential

                                                         Page 14 of 21
Talk4writing, PE and computing. Connections with the local High School is broadening opportunities, for example our Year 6
children joined with High School Pupils to play in an orchestra together, radio council students take part in projects across
school and visit other schools and report on a wide range of events. School leaders are collaborating further to explore the
reciprocal opportunities to develop pupils of both sites and opportunities for sta to work together.
Workload and mental wellbeing is monitored by SLT with weekly considerations of individual sta and supportive strategies
put in place. Where initiatives and school developments are sought, the additional workload is considered and mitigated,
without reducing our ambitions for children. For example, sta planning needed developing. Initially we focused on core
subjects and then once established, the science planning format was adopted within other subjects. This carefully planned
approach allowed sta to become more e ective in their planning but in manageable steps. Planning was supported by
subject leads and exempli cation supported the development of skills. To enhance the opportunities for children, we aimed to
introduce sta led clubs free of charge for pupils following the restrictions in place due to Covid. Teachers were asked to lead a
club a week and selected their own club based on their own interests. As a result, both sta and pupils enjoy their clubs and
comment on the bene ts for wellbeing. Sta share the responsibility to support workload and to ensure that clubs can still
take place in case of absence.
Sta wellbeing is regularly discussed. All sta fully engaged in wellbeing training directed at their own mental health and many
undertook further study about supporting children. Wellbeing is regularly referred to in sta brie ng with practical ideas to
support sta such as leaving on time, managing marking to reduce the need for marking in the evenings, careful planning
ahead to ensure management of occurring extras such as parents evening, assessments and events. A visual reminder display
in the sta room supports sta further and a named Mental Health Champion actively engages with members of sta as
required.
Sta report their wellbeing is enhanced by the opportunities to lead in areas of interest in addition to the professional
development o ered for areas of leadership. Regular career pathway meetings support teachers and support sta in planning
career aspirations, career stage expectations ensure equity in opportunity. Sta are encouraged to undertake NPQs with 9
sta having just completed or currently undertaking one. Sta are supported with both masters’ degrees and PhD study.
All leaders have weekly supervision meetings. Supervision lasts one hour and is in 3 parts it is designed to ensure leaders
develop the necessary leadership tools to work e ectively, increase leadership capacity to enable Halcyon's mission vision and
aims to become a reality.
All leaders are part of professional organisations and nationally accredited networks, leaders explore partnerships locally,
regionally and nationally. Leaders work with the education, business and voluntary sector to design projects that enhance the
provision for students.
SLT completed blue sky events with children, parents and sta to gather their views about the school. These have been
collated and SLT will reporting key ndings and associated actions. Already, in newsletters, information about the activities of
leaders is included to help parents to see what monitoring and support is in place in school. As a result of a parent Governor
Comment at the end Summer 2022/23 stating that parents did not understand maths strategies used in school, maths became
the focus of parent cafes in the Autumn Term. Parents already receive written information about calculation strategies. Our
strategies document is currently being updated but will then be shared with parents to further support them at home. Pupil
and Parent voice is gathered by subject leads throughout the year and our pupil councils provide valuable support for leaders
in creating the school that pupils want.
Leaders complete self-evaluations and share with stakeholders. Evidence is gathered from a range of sources and agreed
between leaders. These are shared with Governors who are able to ask additional questions and o er support and challenge.
Areas for development are based on any issues and re ections, areas for planned developments such as projects and
re ection against standards and good practice. With the current aim to meet requirements for Outstanding for the next
OFSTED inspection, the grade descriptors have been used to assess performance and identify areas which are not fully
evidenced or embedded.
Having recently federated, Governance of the school is newly formed. Many of the existing governors applied as co-opted
governors and 2 new parent governors were added alongside a member of the business community as a new Chair. This is
further supported by the Local Authority. Regular meetings relating to safeguarding, curriculum or nance are held and
reports provided by the Executive Head, Heads of School and curriculum leaders as required. Prior to Federation, Governors
monitored provision in school, meeting with leaders and completing reports. Governors are very clear about their
responsibilities and bring a good range of expertise to their roles, they share the high expectations of the schools leaders.



Drake Primary School                                                                                                18/11/2023
                                                                                                       Private & Confidential

                                                        Page 15 of 21
Drake has a culture of strong safeguarding practice. All documentation and record keeping is exact, sta are fully aware of the
signs of potential abuse and they report their concerns. Leaders and sta work e ectively with external partners to help pupils
who are at risk or who are the subject of a multi-agency plan. Leaders promote equality of opportunity and diversity
exceptionally well, for pupils and sta , so that the ethos and culture of the whole school counters any form of direct or indirect
discriminatory behaviour.
Leaders, sta and pupils do not tolerate prejudiced behaviour. Recruitment policies and practices are managed to ensure that
children are protected. The recruitment process actively ensures that sta who join the school are value aligned and
committed to the wellbeing of children. Leaders understand their duties and policies and procedures are reviewed regularly.
Governors ratify policies before they are released and have the opportunity to ask questions and make comments.
Leaders understand protective characteristics and actively ensure that behaviours and systems do not discriminate. Our
recruitment processes are not prejudiced, applications and current sta workforce shares the inclusive ethos of our school
and ensures that everyone is welcomed and valued, there is currently good re ection of the protective characteristics.
Sta understand school code of conduct and expectations and know that adherence to this non-negotiable and for the best
interests of the whole school community. All training is in line with KCSIE and all documentation is amended appropriately.
There are clear records of sta having read at least part one of KCSIE and this can be evidenced in their practice. Prevent is
reviewed regularly with sta completing the online training.
All sta receive a safeguarding induction a checklist highlighting the safeguarding guidance given to sta and volunteers. All
sta receive the following documents as part of this induction: School's safeguarding ; child protection policy Sta code of
conduct Behaviour Policy, School's safeguarding response to children who go missing from education part one; Annex A of
'Keeping Children Safe in Education Information about the DSLs. Sta receive child protection, ACE, Prevent training as part of
their induction. The school retains evidence of sta induction. Supply sta , contractors, volunteers and visitors also receive key
safeguarding information; please describe what form this takes in your school. The DSL and deputy DSLs have received
suitable training in line with national and local requirements. Additionally other sta are trained as DSLs to ensure that there is
a high level of vigilance around school whilst the daily safeguarding decisions and actions are made by the DSL team. In
addition to the whole school safeguarding training, Early Years teams undertake additional safeguarding training and support
from the pastoral team/additional DSL/SENDCO, they undertake home visits and work closely with wider agencies. All sta use
CPOMs.
Outcomes and children's well-being are at the heart of all we do at Drake. The breadth of the curriculum is far reaching and
opportunities are available for all. Inclusivity is our strength and we remained child focused and solution focused at all times.
We work closely with external agencies to ensure that the sta team meet the needs of children and where the child's needs
exceed what is possible in school that appropriate actions are taken to get the support that they need. Drake has a reputation
for success in integration of students with SEMH/SEND. In the last year we have welcome 4 managed moves.
Strengths
     Leaders ensure that teachers receive focused and highly e ective professional development. Teachers’ subject,
     pedagogical and pedagogical content knowledge consistently build and develop over time. This consistently translates
     into improvements in the teaching of the curriculum
     Leaders ensure that highly e ective and meaningful engagement takes place with sta at all levels and that issues are
     identi ed. When issues are identi ed, in particular about workload, they are consistently dealt with appropriately and
     quickly.
     Sta consistently report high levels of support for well-being issues.
     Leaders engage e ectively with pupils and others in their community, including, when relevant, parents, employers and
     local services. Engagement opportunities are focused and have purpose.
     Leaders are highly e ective at training new leaders
Opportunities for Development
     Those responsible for governance understand their role and carry this out e ectively. Governors/trustees ensure that the
     school has a clear vision and strategy, that resources are managed well and that leaders are held to account for the
     quality of education
     Induction of new leaders to Drake and Halcyon including through the 'Leaders Like Us' programme
     Share best practice at a regional, national and global level




Drake Primary School                                                                                                 18/11/2023
                                                                                                        Private & Confidential

                                                         Page 16 of 21
Early Years
JUDGEMENT


     Outstanding                                            Requires
                                    Good                                              Inadequate                  No Grade
                                                          Improvement
            ✓

Early Years at Drake are valued as the earliest opportunities to engage children and nurture their curiosity and love of the
world building the strong foundations for their lifelong learning. The curriculum design ensures opportunities to introduce and
develop a range of skills with a particular focus of PSED and CL on entry into school. Other learning areas are quickly
introduced with phonics lessons, talk 4 writing and maths input which is then maximised through continuous provision
opportunities and enhancements.
The curriculum was designed for the implementation of the new curriculum in 2021 following training with Early Excellence.
This training was attended by nursery sta , reception teachers and SLT.
The Early Years Curriculum is rooted in the opportunities to build on the interests of the children yet still meet the
requirements of the curriculum. In line with the overall school curriculum, it includes key concepts and questions,
opportunities to make connections and to learn about the wider world.
Themes - People and communities; Stories, rhymes and morals; The World
These themes allow for all aspects of the EYFS Curriculum to be taught in a purposeful and engaging way whilst still allowing
 exibility to respond to the needs and interests of the children. Children follow the sequences for planning as set out for the
rest of the school and engage with Talk4Writing and NCETM maths.
Open ended opportunities and learning through play enhance opportunities for children to make connections and apply their
learning whilst being actively engaged through play and exploration, thinking critically and collaborating with others. We are
currently developing our outdoor provision to support this further.
All children in Reception have opportunities during the year to engage in PE, Forest school and swimming. Their bespoke
woodland area and training of sta to support outdoor learning increases the opportunities to engage with their world. Trips
and opportunities such as the visiting puppet theatre further enhance and enrich the curriculum and develop the children's
cultural capital.
Storytelling began before children even started at school. Sta shared videos telling stories with the children during the
summer term and over the summer holidays. Communication via Tapestry (all about me and memos) encouraged parents to
share details about children’s favourite books. When starting at school, children had small key group activities speci cally
about handling and respecting books. Children have free access to the book area. Children listen to stories daily in a way that
engages and excites them promoting an ethos of reading for pleasure. During the children’s rst full week in school, the
children started taking home a sharing book and a reading diary to record when stories are shared.
Phonics teaching starts quickly once children have settled using RWI. Assessments every half term to assess progress and
impact. When individual children are ready, they are given opportunities to start reading sentences and Ditties moving on to
Big cat Collins book scheme with a wider range of ction and non ction texts. Stories are fundamental in reception and the
children regularly listen to stories. They learn to retell a story through our Talk4Writing programme and then innovate this
becoming storytellers themselves.
The theme 'Stories rhymes and morals' allows for children to learn about a range of stories including tales from a range of
cultures and also to explore non- ction. Children learn that books are for pleasure and for information and start to
understand their purpose.
Clear mathematical resources in place from as soon as the children start in reception including both indoor and outdoor
opportunities. Baseline assessments focused on number recognition, writing, counting, positional language and awareness of
shape. Taught input occurs daily along with opportunities to master number through the NCETM intervention programme.
Songs and rhymes are used as well as maths stories. Further planned opportunities evident in planning and through

Drake Primary School                                                                                                     18/11/2023
                                                                                                         Private & Confidential

                                                          Page 17 of 21
continuous provision. Sta use spontaneous as well as planned opportunities to encourage and support maths skills and
evidence this through unplanned observations. The Early Years Lead attends an EY Maths consortium to ensure teaching and
provision in line with best practice.
Our focus on early reading and phonics along with the whole school approach to writing and early maths ensures that the
children in Reception are part of the wider school initiatives but with Early Years appropriate pedagogy. Sta are supported to
maintain their professional development not only for generic subjects but speci cally for Early Years. As well as the focus on
the areas of development, children's characteristics of e ective learning are supported. Children are actively engaged in their
play and exploration, asking questions and o ering their own hypothesis. Children are encouraged to evaluate their play and
make changes accordingly, for example when constructing assault courses, the children assess risk and manage this
themselves, often adding to their constructions. Children sustain interest in their play and are self motivated. Sta understand
the needs of those that nd this most challenging and support them to persevere and develop resilience in an age/stage
appropriate manner.
PSED has been planned for the beginning of the year so that children develop a sense of themselves and others along with
being a member of the class community. Children are taught to share, take turns and listen to each other with respect and
courtesy through modelling and support during play and speci c learning opportunities. Children are praised and rewarded
for positive and considerate behaviours. Children demonstrate positive behaviours and are supported to self-regulate.
Diversity is embedded in children’s learning and all children are re ected through toys, books and learning experiences.
Collective worship allows children to learn about the school values and children are taught to respect all faiths and religions.
The themes for learning also allow for the exploration of traditions, beliefs and cultural variation.
The school community is valued by the children and they recognise various individuals around the school. The initial half term
plan includes meeting a range of people in school and nding out about what they do. Other visitors in school and
opportunities for trips, further help the children to engage with their community.
The CoEL are taught through attitudes to learning and play tasks. Children are encouraged to question, test ideas, adapt,
concentrate, persevere, ask questions etc. Children’s patterns of behaviour are noted and planned for.
Adults skilfully observe during the day and engage children as required in either large, small or individual opportunities.
Teaching is appropriate for early Years and this results in good learning experiences for the children.
Varied equipment and resources both indoors and out allow children to develop and express their own interests freely so that
they can play, explore and learn independently. Di erent Areas of learning are planned for both indoors and out and children
have free access to indoor and outdoor activities throughout most of the day.
Children are well settled in school and respond to the routines and boundaries that are in place. Children develop
independence through the expectations throughout the day including selecting their own resources for play, self-help skills
and lunch time routines. The experiences and opportunities provided for our youngest pupils demonstrate our overall high
expectations for outcomes for children. For example their trips, visitors, performance opportunities and school engagement in
forest school and swimming. We are currently seeking opportunities to engage with other schools and opportunities to
develop children's cultural capital outside of school.
The strong focus on the best outcomes for each individual child drive our practice. Whilst striving for all children to meet their
full potential, we are able to be focused on the end of year expectations and still value the progress made by individuals
including those with SEND. SEND reviews, pupil progress meetings and regular opportunities to discuss pupils keeps teachers
focussed on what gaps in knowledge and skills children might have and how to best support them to achieve. Information is
shared with parents through the sharing of wow moments on Tapestry, the updated website, half termly year group
newsletters, weekly whole school newsletters and more formally in parents evenings and an end of year report. Parental
engagement through assemblies, cafes and other school events are mapped out across the year providing lots of
opportunities for parents to engage in their children's learning.
SLT have strong knowledge and experience of the EYFS and provision for children from birth to also support transition into
school. The EYFS Lead and reception team is also experienced in this area. Tapestry is used to assess learning and
development in EYFS which is constantly sampled and monitored. Feedback is then given to all EYFS sta including LSAs to
support the accurate and e ective assessment of children. Previously, articles and reading has been shared with sta about
assessment and sta teams asked to re ect on and discuss speci c points.
CPD opportunities to develop sta ’s understanding of the EYFS and characteristics of e ective learning are maximised either
through face to face CPD or reading and activities provided. Links with LP nursery ensures that adults have a good


Drake Primary School                                                                                                  18/11/2023
                                                                                                         Private & Confidential

                                                         Page 18 of 21
understanding of development and can see where children have started.
Initial inset at the start of the year gave training on wellbeing, curriculum updates and SEND/behaviour as well as
Safeguarding. Weekly CPD in sta meetings for class teachers is in line with school Mission, Vision and Aims and responsive to
teacher and school needs. Subject leads deliver sessions and EYFS training for teachers is planned for January 2024. Teachers
and LSAs in Reception are encouraged to undertake their own CPD to keep up to date with latest developments, this has
included specialist EY maths training and Talk4Writing which is a whole school approach. The school uses RWI and all EY sta
are trained in this to support the early reading of our youngest pupils. Regular support from the phonics lead, online materials
and training resources and development days with a consultant further support the development of practice. The EY lead
attends maths consortiums and EY assessment and moderation events were attended during 2022/23. The moderation
activities ensured that teachers had a good understanding of expectations so that they could focus their teaching and ensure
success. GLD 2023 was 73% which is slightly above National 2022 (2023 data not yet available)
Baseline assessments are used on entry which then form the basis of target setting for individual children providing realistic
but ambitious targets to ensure that children are given the best possible start to their school education. School assessments,
Wellcomm and Boxall are used in addition to the DfE reception Baseline. Pupil Progress meetings to discuss individual children
are held termly with SLT and key aspects for development and focus in English and Maths are discussed. Sta are supported to
re ect on practice with a strong focus on children’s outcomes. Teachers identify the lowest 20% of the class, key marginal
children and those who are demonstrating signs of exceeding ELGS. Throughout the year, the team are supported to closely
monitor progress and target speci c areas of development. This results in children making signi cant progress and
consistently exceeding National GLD data despite low starting points and high levels of SEND within cohorts.
Teachers know who their SEND and EAL groups are and understand their individual needs. Discussions with SLT and the
pastoral team ensure regular monitoring of groups and how they are accessing provision. With a signi cant increase of
children with SEND joining reception in recent year, sta liaise and work closely together to meet the needs of the individual
and the cohort.
Children with SEND are identi ed and a SEND review took place with the SENDCO in the rst Half term. Needs are monitored
and parents involved when necessary. Ambitions for children remain high and levels of support needed to help each child ful l
their potential are in place.
Pupil Progress meetings allow for the discussions regarding particular groups or individual children. Discussion around SEND
and EAL have including determining their individual starting points and then strategies for progress and attainment put in
place. SRB support for children with Autism and other needs is also in place.
Weekly planning meets all areas of the curriculum. Key learning objectives are identi ed and Key workers have speci c tasks to
do with the children which are well planned. Curriculum topics are planned for the year but children’s interests feed into the
planning of activities and learning opportunities. Children have a wide range of experiences throughout the week in both
indoors and outdoor areas. Evidence of this is recorded on Tapestry.
Children have plenty of opportunities for child-initiated learning which helps children to stay motivated. During and formal
whole class teaching time, the children are supported by LSAs and the teaching input is short and relevant for learning. Stories,
rhymes and songs are used daily to develop children's communication, listening, speech and language development and also
their wider understanding of the world, communities, values and events through both ction and non- ction texts. Focus small
group activities with adults help to ensure that children understand expectations and keeps children interested this also
supports the introduction of key vocabulary. Individual needs are known by sta so that they can support children as required
and measures are in place for children with additional needs.
Learning opportunities are appropriately planned to ensure there is su cient challenge yet not so simple that children
become disengaged. Challenges and focus jobs given to children help them to approach opportunities with a positive growth
mindset and to build resilience and perseverance. Children have positive relationships with adults who get to know their
children very well.
Our new Reception building was opened in February 2023. The impact of capital project including a reduction of play spaces,
building noise outside of the classroom and packing and preparing for a move was mitigated through the opportunity to
discuss growth and developments, learning about construction, involving the children in the 'adventure.' 2023/24 will be the
 rst full year in the new classrooms. Aspects of this are still being developed, for example maximising opportunities in the
outdoor area. This will continue to evolve throughout the year.




Drake Primary School                                                                                               18/11/2023
                                                                                                       Private & Confidential

                                                        Page 19 of 21
Classrooms are spacious and allow for movement between areas. Classrooms have a lockable cupboard within which they
store items including cleaning materials. The outdoor space is also spacious and allows for exploration.
Children are taught about taking risks and assessing the safety of themselves and others. When risk is not appropriate,
children are spoken to about this so that they understand the dangers which helps them to assess risk themselves in the
future. Children are taught to be careful and safe rather than preventing any risk taking. For example in forest school. Personal
safety and safeguarding are taught through the PSED curriculum including PANTS lessons, road safety, stranger danger, online
safety etc.
Classrooms have risk assessment folders to monitor and analyse incidents and accidents. Sta have access to asthma inhalers,
other medicines are stored out of the classroom. Allergies and dietary needs are known, this information is shared on
application and also within the ‘All about me’ page on Tapestry. Allergies are displayed so that all sta are aware. Dietary needs
are shared with the kitchen and classroom sta .
Children have settled well and have strong relationships with adults and peers. they know the routines and expectations in
school due to successful transition.
Transition activities include:
     Information evening
     Nursery visits
     Home visits
     Teddy Bears Picnic event
     Additional opportunities for the children and parents to visit where SEND needs have been identi ed.
The rst week of school is part time provision in smaller groups to support early attachments with adults and help children to
learn the routines and expectations. Teachers are also able to start undertaking baselines and spend quality time with the
children. Teachers and SLT contributed to this including Teachers who would cover PPA. Parents completed All about me
pages which were used to plan provision before the children started including arranging meetings regarding speci c needs.
Teachers meet with the SENDCO early in the year to raise concerns about speci c children as required. Strategies are
discussed and plans in place to support with evidence gathering for EHCP applications and/or SRB referrals. Pupil progress
meetings allow for individual needs to be discussed and a review of practice to support key areas. As the year continues, pupil
progress meetings become more speci c regarding individual pupils and areas of
Parent engagement as a result of the transition work is strong. Sharing information continues well to keep parents informed
about their children. All observations are uploaded to Tapestry and are available for parents who can also contribute.
Suggestions of activities etc that can be done at home are given through Tapestry activities or shared video instruction. Parent
hub is used for more generic messages to parents and a weekly newsletter is shared via Parenthub and on the website.
Information regarding the EYFS intent, implementation and impact are online along with curriculum information. Year group
newsletters are share half termly and the year group website is updated regularly. It showcases the wide range of
opportunities that children have and gives curriculum and timetable information.
Parents Evening in the Autumn and Spring o er opportunities to share information about how the children had settled into
school. A full written report is provided at the end of the academic Year. In addition to these, parents are invited into school for
various events throughout the year including parent cafes and assemblies or whole school events.
Strengths
     The EYFS curriculum provides no limits or barriers to the children’s achievements, regardless of their backgrounds,
     circumstances or needs. The high ambition it embodies is shared by all sta .
     The impact of the curriculum on what children know, can remember and do is strong. Children demonstrate this through
     being deeply engaged and sustaining high levels of concentration. Children, including those from disadvantaged
     backgrounds, do well. Children with SEND achieve the best possible outcomes.
     Children are highly motivated and are eager to join in. They share and cooperate well, demonstrating high levels of self-
     control and respect for others. Children consistently keep on trying hard, particularly if they encounter di culties.
Opportunities for development
     Broaden opportunities for collboration with the wider community including other schools


Drake Primary School                                                                                                  18/11/2023
                                                                                                          Private & Confidential

                                                          Page 20 of 21
Overall
JUDGEMENT


     Outstanding                                          Requires
                                   Good                                            Inadequate                 No Grade
                                                        Improvement
           ✓

School life at Drake is exceptional. Through our school values we nurture, guide, support and inspire our pupils to develop
their own personalities and interests with high ambition and aspirations for their futures. Our school team are focused on the
best outcomes for children and where areas for improvement are seen, actively seek to resolve this. Our child-centred
approach ensures that positive relationships form the basis of all other success. Our children behave well because they want
to, they are motivated to do well and to support others. Where some children have di culties, these are understood by others
and we are proud of the inclusive nature of our school despite the challenges that this may bring. We believe that every child
in school, must be valued and must meet their potential. Intensive work with families and external professionals ensures that
this remains a priority. E ective systems are in place and support sta well.
Leaders in school are not only mindful of the growth and development of our pupils but also the sta . Sta are valued and as
a result, they too ourish which only further enhances the opportunities and experiences of our pupils. Leaders are
unrelenting in the ambition for the school community and this drive ensures that we are always striving to develop, improve
and excel. Our commitment to the wide opportunities for children including trips and visits, after school activities, themed
events and activities, competitive events, performances and arts opportunities, collaboration and projects with other schools,
a school radio, music, swimming and forest school for every child ensures that all of our children are able to discover and
develop their interests and passions. Our engagement with external sources such as the John Innes Centre, Skills escalator
days, Manufacturing Days help to prepare our children for their futures. Our current engagement in projects including careers
related learning, Lyfta, Global Neighbours, Leading Equality and Inclusion, Courageous Advocacy will provide opportunities for
the children to learn about the wider world. Whilst these are new to the school, they will feed into curriculum development
over the coming years. Leaders of all levels are supported to carry out their role, senior leaders have supervision with the
Executive Head of school and Middle leaders are supported by the Senior Leadership Team. Subject leads have time allocated
to their role weekly or biweekly.
The curriculum design is ambitious and provides opportunities for deep learning and connections across subjects. To date,
focus as part of the Covid recovery curriculum was re-establishing a curriculum maintaining the breadth without narrowing to
core subjects but still being mindful of what skills and knowledge were essential to children's success. 2021/22 saw the
introduction of a new curriculum and this was re ned for 2022/23. We are now in the second year of delivering the new
curriculum so teaching and learning is starting to include more connections between aspects of our learning and make
connections to wider aspects of life and experiences. Our engagement with external advisors ensures that we access current
research and subject related pedagogy. For example, we have this year engaged with the Thetford Heritage Projects and each
year group will complete a project that will be supported by historians.
Children in the Early Years consistently achieve well, despite low starting points and results in GLD and phonics are
consistently above national expectations. Routines and structures in place support the e ective delivery of a well constructed
curriculum. Children are engaged and motivated and keen to share their new learning. Our play based curriculum in Year 1
ensures that children continue to have opportunities to practice and apply learning through continuous provision and
challenges suitable to their age and stage of development and this prepares the children well for the next stage of their
education. Our current school key priority is to make better use of assessment systems and data to ensure that knowledge
gaps are identi ed quickly and that this informs planning to ensure that children make progress and achieve. our
developments in teaching and learning have seen a signi cant shift in teacher con dence and skills and as a result, outcomes
for children are improving. The skilled leadership team continues to ensure that high expectations and ambitions for the
children drive the pursuit of excellence and outstanding quality of education for children.




Drake Primary School                                                                                              18/11/2023
                                                                                                      Private & Confidential

                                                        Page 21 of 21
