Skip to Main Content

Free shipping when you spend $40. Terms apply.

Sign up and get a free ebook!

Don’t miss our ebook deals!

Avoid publishing scams. Learn more.

[]

[]

categories

Audiobooks

Biography & Memoir

Book Club Favorites

Business & Economics

Children

Cooking

Crosswords

eBook Deals

Fiction

Health & Wellness

History

Mystery/Detective

Politics

Romance

Science Fiction

Star Trek

Teen

Thrillers

SEE ALL CATEGORIES

------------------------------------------------------------------------

authors

------------------------------------------------------------------------

new releases

------------------------------------------------------------------------

bestsellers

New York Times® Bestsellers

Featured S&S Bestsellers

------------------------------------------------------------------------

collections

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[]

Australia Canada India United Kingdom

[]

[]

[]

- []
  LOOK
- []
  WATCH

[Great and Unfortunate Things]

An error occurred.

Unable to execute JavaScript.

Great and Unfortunate Things

By Jason Arday

Hardcover

- eBook
- Unabridged Audio Download

Hardcover

LIST PRICE $29.00

PRICE MAY VARY BY RETAILER

Ships on or around August 11, 2026

- []
- []
- []
- []
- []
- []
- []

Table of Contents

- Excerpt
- Rave and Reviews

About The Book

With the power of Educated and the emotional sweep of When Breath
Becomes Air, this inspiring underdog story follows a nonverbal autistic
boy—whom society had all but given up on—as he finds his voice,
literally and figuratively, becomes one of the youngest professors in
the University of Cambridge’s history, and ultimately puts himself in a
position to give back.
Jason Arday grew up in a lively corner of South London as the second
youngest of three boys. He was diagnosed with autism and developmental
delays at age three, and experts told his parents he would never speak,
write, or live independently—and should be institutionalized.
His parents refused. Instead, his extraordinary mother, Giff, drawing on
her faith and thinking outside the box, embraced his neurodivergence and
devoted herself to helping him realize a potential few others believed
possible—using everything from the proverbs of her West African culture
to music, sports, and film to help him make sense of the world.
In Great and Unfortunate Things, we see how Arday went from being
nonverbal as a child and illiterate until he was eighteen to scaling
unimag-inable heights as an adult. Without romanticizing the struggle,
this is a story of determination against seemingly insurmountable
odds—and of a family and a small group of believers whose compassion
helped him see what is possible.
A powerful story for our moment, Arday’s journey is a testament to
resilience, dignity, and the life-changing force of community in action.

Excerpt

Prologue Prologue
It had been two days of interviewing for the professorship, and on the
train home from Cambridge, I was exhausted. After getting off at London
King’s Cross station, I took the Tube as far as my stop, Clapham Common,
and walked through Old Town, past the familiar shops and cafés, towards
our house, the place where I grew up, where it all began. It was already
getting dark, and the lights were glowing warmly in the front window. I
turned my key in the lock and went inside. In the living room, my mum,
Giff, was in front of the television sipping tea laced with evaporated
milk. I’ve always called her Giff—never Mum—that’s just how it’s been.
She was sitting in her deep, red, velvety chair affectionately known as
The Mothership that, over the years, had come to know the shape of her,
even when she wasn’t in it. To this day, if you’re sitting in that
chair, you’d better vacate it as soon as Giff walks into the room; that
chair is her sanctuary, her throne, fit for our matriarch, our queen.
Like the Mothership, Giff has always been a constant source of comfort
for me. I went to hug her and told her I couldn’t stay long, that I was
just there for an hour or so to pick up some stuff, then I had to leave
to get the train to Brighton. I was giving a keynote speech there the
next morning.
Giff asked me when I would hear about the job. I told her it might be a
few days, maybe more. As it turned out, I didn’t have to wait as long as
that. About an hour after I got home, my phone rang. It was a Cambridge
number, so I answered. The voice on the other end of the line calmly
explained that they had made their decision: they were excited to offer
me the Professorship in the Sociology of Education.
After the call was over, I came downstairs to find Giff still in her
chair. She saw the smile breaking through my poor attempt at a poker
face.
“You did it, didn’t you, Jason?” she asked.
“No, Giff,” I told her. “We did. We did it…”
We hugged as Giff cried into my shoulder.
Of all the places I could have been when that phone call came in, it was
only right that I was home with Giff. Of course she was overjoyed for
me, but she had been overjoyed so many times, at every one of my
milestones—not just the big ones, but the small ones too.
Given where we had started, there had been a lot of milestones along the
way.
When I was three years old, the doctors diagnosed me with autism and
global developmental delay, which is a term used when children under the
age of five have significant delays in speech, cognitive abilities,
motor skills, or social skills. My delays were in all of the above.
“There’s no one in there,” the doctors told Giff. They said that I was
“deficient,” and that I’d never be able to talk, read, or write. One
doctor insisted I was “no better than a vegetable” and wouldn’t be able
to have meaningful relationships. “He’ll never be able to live
independently. Never be able to go to school with normal children. You
might want to place him in long-term care or a home for children with
similar difficulties because he’s going to need lifelong support.” To
them, I was a lost cause.
Giff was devastated, as any parent would be, but she was also a person
of faith who had already been through many challenges in her life. Soon
after the doctors gave their grim prognosis, something occurred to her:
These experts don’t have a crystal ball. She decided they didn’t know
what the future held. How could they—or anyone, for that matter—measure
a child’s potential at such an early stage in his life?
No one wanted to listen to Giff, a humble woman from Ghana without a
degree or letters after her name (those accolades would come later). The
doctors wanted her to submit to their “better” and “superior” judgment,
but they failed to see that her lack of formal training actually worked
to my advantage because she was able to approach being my parent with an
open and fluid mind. Before the word “neurodiversity” had even been
coined, Giff understood the concept: that every human is an individual,
unique and whole—and that the world needs all kinds of people. God had
made me, and so God, in his infinite wisdom, had given her not a burden
but a gift. This was an article of faith for her.
Giff decided to ignore the “experts.” Instead, she chose to listen to
her heart—and the words of the South Asian midwife who had delivered me
at the hospital. It had been a difficult pregnancy and labor, and as
legend had it, when I finally made my entrance on the 9th of May, 1985,
the Tears for Fears song “Everybody Wants to Rule the World” was playing
on the radio.
After my arrival, the midwife stayed at the bedside, holding my hand and
studying my long fingers. Then she looked at Giff straight in the eye
and said: “Where I come from, babies with long fingers are special. This
boy is destined for great things. You hear? You take care of this
child.”
“Of course I will,” Giff told her.
When her shift ended, the midwife returned to check on me. “He’s going
to do something special,” she repeated. “I’m telling you: please, please
look after him.”
These words made a lasting impression on Giff, and she returned to them
again and again when others encouraged her to give up on me. They helped
her to envision a future for me that the naysayers couldn’t see. “I
don’t know what that woman did to you when she delivered you, Jason,”
Giff would later say, “but I always feel like she blessed you with
something because you have some truly exceptional gifts, and the things
that you’ve done and experienced are inexplicable. So maybe she was
right.”
But there was another prophecy that has resonated throughout my life—one
I didn’t hear until I was twenty-one years old. It was 2006, and I was
on a relief mission in Brazil, working with an organization installing
water pumps in poor communities. We traveled from place to place,
spending two or three days in Rio de Janeiro’s favelas—shantytowns that
cling to the hillsides, stacked with tumbledown houses and shacks.
It was the middle of the day, baking hot, and the sky was a brighter
blue than someone who grew up in overcast South London could ever have
imagined. We were in one of the favelas, teaching a group of children
how to use the new pumps so they could finally drink clean water. I
didn’t speak Portuguese, but I was paired with a local aid worker who
spoke some English, a woman in her thirties with dark hair and eyes and
a gentle, steady way about her. She translated my words, and together we
demonstrated how the pump worked.
The children were smiling and attentive, though it was clear they were
itching to play football with the makeshift ball made from plastic
bottles and cardboard that one of them was carrying around.
At some point, the aid worker studied me as I bent down to help one of
the children. Then she said quietly, almost to herself but loudly enough
for me to hear: “You have a very beautiful heart.”
I smiled and swiftly replied, “That’s really kind of you.”
Then she moved towards me and rested her hand on my arm before speaking
again. “I can tell you’re destined to do great things. But I also
believe you’re destined for very sad and difficult things as well.”
It stopped me cold.
“What? Any more than other people?” I asked, half confused, half
unsettled. This woman had just met me. She didn’t know anything about
me.
She looked straight into my eyes. “Yes. I think so.”
We let the conversation drift after that, but her words rattled in my
head the rest of the day and late into the night. The next morning, when
I saw her again, I pressed her.
“Why would you say that about my life? About great things and sad things
and difficult things?”
She smiled almost regretfully. “Maybe I drank too much the night
before.”
“No,” I said. “You seemed perfectly sober.”
She closed her eyes and then opened them and spoke again: “It’s just a
feeling. I could be wrong. But my feeling is that you will face very
challenging times, and still, you will achieve greatness. That is God’s
will. So you must never lose faith.”
After the trip was over, I never saw the woman again, but her words
stayed with me and, you might say, her prediction came true. The child
whose parents were told he was less than human is now living a life
filled with meaning and purpose, yet there has been sadness and
difficulty too, experiences that have stretched my faith to breaking
point. Somehow, the impossible became the possible, even if the path to
get here was winding, fraught with obstacles, never straight.
As part of my job, I’m often asked to give talks all around the
country—and the world. Every time I do, people come up to me afterwards,
always with the same question: “How did you do it?” I know what they’re
asking me. They want me to tell them how I went from the challenges of
my early years to being a professor. But it’s hard to give them the
short version because the truth is, it’s a long and complicated story.
Was destiny involved? The great and unfortunate things foretold? Or was
it because of the system that failed me, and some truly extraordinary
people who loved and believed in me, and helped me to overcome those
barriers? Or something else altogether? And so, I usually just reply
that I didn’t do it on my own, and that I was lucky to have a lot of
supporters in my corner because it meant that I was never allowed to
give up on myself, even when I was desperate to do so. And none of these
people were more important than my mother.
The day I got the news about the Cambridge job, I knew that for Giff, it
had been thirty-seven years of pure faith, encouragement, dedication,
hard work, and love. I also knew then what I had always known: that as
long as I tried my best—as long as I gave it my all—Giff would be happy.
Her love is unconditional and all-encompassing in that way. Cambridge
was a quite remarkable and unimaginable cherry, but for Giff it was not
the cake.
The cake was all in the moments that came before.
Chapter One: A Different Timescale CHAPTER ONE A Different Timescale
It’s a strange thing to spend almost twelve years of your life without
language, and then to have to describe that time using only words, as
I’m doing here. Most of my memories of my early childhood are of
generalized images, sounds, sensations, feelings, rather than specific
events, perhaps because language helps us to form memories, and I didn’t
have access to that until I was older. But there are at least two core
images of my childhood self that stand out to me.
The first is of being in our kitchen, either tethered by a cloth to
Giff’s back or perched on her hip. Both gave me a great vantage point,
and I would cling on while she worked, her hands always in motion as she
finely chopped tomatoes, onions, peppers, and scotch bonnets, fingers
crumbling Maggi seasoning cubes into the dish of the day. She’d lean
over the stove, and I’d tip with her, feeling the steam rising and then
cooling on my skin as she took the cook’s privilege of tasting the edge
of the wooden spoon, assessing for flavor and of course the
spiciness—the hotter the better. Ever resourceful, she could make one
pan of soup or stew last for four or five days, adding to it, heating
and reheating. Her favorite to cook was the Ghanaian staple light soup,
with its fiery tomato-infused broth, as it had a longer shelf life and
was also the least labor-intensive to assemble while holding a toddler
on your hip or having them harnessed to your back. I’d watch in
fascination as the soup came to a boil on the stove. From that same
perch, I saw bread rise, cakes ripple, and biscuits thicken. When she
took the bread out of the oven, Giff always tapped the bottom of the
loaves with her finger so she could feel the density and hear the
hollowness. Then I’d watch her cut the first slice, the knife serrating
through and the steam emerging from the bready insides. On the days when
there wasn’t enough food in the cupboard and we had cereal for dinner,
Giff added evaporated milk and sugar to sweeten the experience, making
it taste more like pudding. Even ketchup and corned beef sandwiches were
delicious when Giff made them. The smell of her cooking saturated the
house, giving the air a thickness that clung to my clothes, so that
every time I went out, it was like carrying a bit of home with me.
My other core memory is of sitting in room 3 of our local health center:
an altogether different experience; this was a small, blank-walled,
antiseptic space with a couple of beanbags to sit on, a single window,
and a table with some blocks and other shapes laid out on it. I spent
hours and hours of my childhood in room 3. After I was diagnosed with
autism and developmental delays, the local council granted me multiple
hours of speech therapy, three days a week, every week, for the best
part of ten years.
All children are born nonverbal, but most children start using words
around their first birthday. That wasn’t the case with me. When I
started speech therapy around the age of four, I had yet to talk, had
only just learned to walk, and still needed someone to spoon-feed me. I
didn’t play with toys much because I didn’t seem to understand their
purpose, and when I did show interest in them, I would often break them.
While most children learn to color with crayons by four, I didn’t have
the fine motor skills for that, nor did I have the cognitive processing
to understand when someone showed me how to do it.
In addition to my various delays, I had sensory sensitivities too,
especially when it came to loud noises. As a result, I often struggled
to leave the house, and Giff had to find all kinds of ways of
distracting and soothing me so we could get to my speech therapy
sessions on time. Outside the house, I was acutely aware of
everything—every sight, every sound, every vibration. Even the air
particles felt different to me after we left the cocoon of home. Inside,
the air was thick like a blanket, full of the scent of Giff’s cooking
and her love, but outside, the air felt much thinner, which made me want
to immediately turn back. The problem was, as much as I wanted to
retreat, I also didn’t want to leave Giff’s side, so I kept going, my
shoulder brushing against her hip as we went, eyes fixed on my feet to
ground me, up the narrow set of steps that led to the main road. The
trees and bushes on either side of the steps were overgrown, so Giff had
to push them aside, and I’d close my eyes, bracing myself, not just for
branches springing back at me, but for the dreaded rumbling roar of the
main road: cars speeding, buses chugging along, the whistle of a bike
going by, the stray runner from the morning doing his loops. At the top
of the steps, she’d make sure to offer me her left hand, my favorite
because it had a keloid scar that had formed after she gashed herself
opening a can of tuna once. I loved that smooth, protruding scar.
Sometimes I’d rub my thumb against it, other times my lip. If I happened
to be on Giff’s right side, I’d run around to grab her left hand so I
could feel the keloid, distracting myself from the growl of the traffic
as we went.
Eventually, we’d arrive at the clinic, a low-level yellow-brick building
with a cold, hard glass front door. If I refused to go inside, Giff had
her methods of persuading me. One of these was to give me a five-pence
piece from her purse. As soon as she handed the coin to me, I became
transfixed by the light reflecting off its gleaming surfaces, the
Queen’s head on one side and the crowned thistle on the other. Giff had
cleverly figured out that a five-pence piece was perfectly designed to
capture my imagination and could therefore be used to successfully
occupy my attention as she ushered me through the door.
Inside, the clinic was as unappealing as it was clinical. No pictures on
the walls, just chipped off-white paint, and underfoot, scuffed floor
tiles giving off the unpleasant whiff of industrial bleach—typical of an
underfunded public-sector building in South London in the late 1980s.
We sat in the waiting area while I examined my prized silver. When it
was time for the session to begin, my therapist, Katrina, came striding
through the swinging glass door on the other side of the room. A
round-faced young woman with hair in a ponytail, Katrina had glasses
sitting on her nose and a weary smile on her face.
After she came to collect us from the lobby, we’d make the short walk to
room 3 on the ground floor. Inside, I’d plunk down on one of the
beanbags, and Giff would whisk away the five-pence piece, gesturing that
she would give it back to me when I’d successfully finished the session.
Giff had already learned that there were many ways to communicate with
me without using words. All she had to do was squeeze my hand as she
retrieved the coin and widen her huge brown eyes, and I knew exactly
what she meant.
Once Giff and the coin had gone, I was left with Katrina and the wooden
blocks and shapes set out on a table in front of me. Katrina’s mouth
started to make noises. What was she trying to tell me? I had no idea. I
could register sounds, but I couldn’t shape them into meaning.
Occasionally, I’d attempt a response, a barely audible “ah” or an “oh”—a
syllable at most, but nothing that added up to a real word. As Katrina
might have said, “There is no clear path through the cognitive and
developmental blockage.”
In every session, she would go through the same exercises, the identical
sequence of words and parts of words, pointing at pictures, trying to
get me to say something. But with nothing visually exciting to grab my
attention, I’d lose interest almost immediately, becoming internally
stimulated instead. That’s when the colors in my mind—the ones I’ve been
able to see for as long as I can remember—would begin to activate. By
blinking my eyes, I was able to send bright orange, blue, and green
smoke clouds swirling around room 3. I’d watch them explode against the
all-white walls, completely occupied and entertained by the fireworks of
my imagination. Sadly, Katrina couldn’t see the smoke clouds, just my
staring, vacant expression.
Despite my therapist’s best efforts, nothing could distract me from this
entertainment except maybe the true object of my desire: the shiny coin
waiting for me, along with Giff, back down the hall. And so, as the
session progressed, Katrina’s tone started to shift, her voice no longer
sweet and imploring but clipped and direct instead. Even if I didn’t
understand her words, I could recognize the signals that something about
her was changing. She’d rub her face, and her glasses, which started the
session resting on the bridge of her nose, would move north until they
were sitting on top of her head.
When I first started going to speech therapy, Katrina was freshly
trained, new to the field, and certain she could make a difference in my
life. But after many months of unsuccessful sessions, her youthful
optimism and enthusiasm started to wear off. One day, as I was waiting
in the lobby with Giff, Katrina burst through the glass door, arms
swinging, looking more resolved than ever to make progress. She marched
me back through the doors and down the hallway towards our usual room.
Giff followed, and after I settled into the beanbag, she bustled off
again, taking my five-pence piece with her. That day, we went through
the usual exercises, Katrina frowning throughout, the double lines
between her eyebrows creasing deeply. Tension filled the room, and I
began to feel the heat rising on the back of my neck. My safe haven,
Giff, was in the waiting room. Out of sight.
Katrina’s calm-on-the-surface demeanor finally began to crack, revealing
the simmering irritation beneath. A look that told me she was not best
pleased with me flashed across her face, then she bent down and paused
for a moment before putting her hands firmly on my narrow shoulders.
Then she started shaking me. For the first few seconds, I thought it was
a game; I actually laughed at the motion of the shaking as it rocked my
head back and forth on my neck. But my laughter made Katrina shake me
even more vigorously, and my smile quickly vanished as her grip
tightened and I felt the pinch of her finger pads digging into the skin
on my arms. A desperate and exhausted figure, my flush-cheeked therapist
finally let me go, her glasses now dislodged from their position by the
sheer force she’d exerted while shaking me.
In truth, whenever I was alone with an adult who wasn’t a family member,
I was fair game for that person to take advantage of me because I had no
way to verbally report their wrongdoings. It was just that Katrina was
the first person to actually do this.
While I didn’t have words at the time to describe what had taken place
in room 3, I somehow understood that what Katrina had done was wrong. As
I came back through the swinging glass door into the waiting room, I
sprinted away from my therapist, nearly bundling Giff over as I crashed
into her well-cushioned hip. She made a little “oof” sound on impact. I
put out my hand in anticipation of the five-pence piece, and Giff handed
me my reward. Then I turned back to look at my therapist, her cheeks
still bright red. Perhaps she felt confident she could count on my
silence. But she would one day be proven wrong. The words would
eventually break through, just on a different timescale from Katrina’s.

About The Author

Photograph by Anselm Ebulue

Jason Arday

Professor Jason Arday is a social commentator, presenter, and public
speaker. He is currently the Professorial Chair of Education (Sociology
of Education) at the University of Cambridge, making him the
youngest-ever Black academic to hold a Professorship at Cambridge and
one of the youngest academics ever appointed to a Professorial Chair in
Oxbridge’s nine-hundred-year history.

Product Details

- Publisher: 37 Ink (August 11, 2026)
- Length: 288 pages
- ISBN13: 9781668085578

Browse Related Books

- Self-Help > Personal Growth > Success
- Biography & Autobiography > Personal Memoirs
- Biography & Autobiography > General

Raves and Reviews

"I love a good story!  As a journalist, storytelling's goal is to both
move and inform. Arday's story is as riveting and moving as they come.
Jason's efforts to overcome obstacles presented by his neurodivergence
are movingly matched only by his mother's extraordinary efforts to
work with his differences not against them, to see the humanity where
others chose to see an inky diagnosis."  — Michelle Miller, New York
Times bestselling author of Belonging: A Daughter's Search for Identity
Through Loss and Love 
"Arday's cinematic story from being nonverbal to becoming one of the
youngest professors ever at Cambridge makes you believe in the
transformative power of grit and the magic of a mother's love. A most
inspiring book."—Chris Gardner, New York Times bestselling author of The
Pursuit of Happyness
"Some lives are changed by talent. Others are changed by love that
refuses to let go. In Great and Unfortunate Things, Jason Arday tells a
story of resilience, dignity, and the extraordinary power of those who
hold steady for us when we cannot yet hold steady for ourselves. This is
a beautiful and unforgettable book." —Steve Pemberton, USA Today
best-selling author of A Chance in the World
“This is a remarkable portrait of an astonishing life. Great and
Unfortunate Things takes us on a spectacular journey of trial and
transformation, offering crucial insight into the realities of
neurodivergence, told by an author who changed the shape of his life
through sheer will. Above all, this memoir is a poignant tribute to
fearless mothers like Arday’s, whose love, education, and unshakable
belief in their children will always make mountains move.” —Safiya
Sinclair, international bestselling author of How to Say Babylon 
“As the mother of a child on the spectrum, I was reminded once again
that there is nothing more fierce than a parent’s determination to see
her child get the services and attention he deserves; nothing more
inspiring than a stranger with nothing to gain who asks How can I help?
and nothing more empowering than intervention combined with positivity,
love, and grit. Read this book and prepare to be inspired.” —Holly
Robinson Peete, actress, autism advocate, and author of Same but
Different: Teen Life on the Autism Express

Resources and Downloads

High Resolution Images

- Book Cover Image (jpg): Great and Unfortunate Things
  Hardcover 9781668085578

- Author Photo (jpg): Jason Arday

  Photograph by Anselm Ebulue

  (0.1 MB)

  Any use of an author photo must include its respective photo credit

Great and Unfortunate Things

By Jason Arday

Hardcover

- eBook
- Unabridged Audio Download

Hardcover

LIST PRICE $29.00

PRICE MAY VARY BY RETAILER

Ships on or around August 11, 2026

- []
- []
- []
- []
- []
- []
- []

Get a FREE ebook by joining our mailing list today!

Plus, receive recommendations and exclusive offers on all of your
favorite books and authors from Simon & Schuster.

By clicking 'Sign me up' I agree to the Terms of Use and acknowledge the
Privacy Policy and Notice of Financial Incentive. Free ebook offer
available to NEW US subscribers only. Offer redeemable at Simon &
Schuster's ebook fulfillment partner. Must redeem within 90 days. See
full terms and conditions and this month's choices.

You may also like: Thriller and Mystery Staff Picks

You May Also Like

Books to Celebrate Autism Acceptance

Explore powerful books that support autism acceptance, raise awareness,
and celebrate neurodiversity. Perfect reads for Autism Acceptance Month
and beyond.

More to Explore

Limited Time eBook Deals

Check out this month's discounted reads.

Learn More

Our Summer Reading Recommendations

Red-hot romances, poolside fiction, and blockbuster picks, oh my! Start
reading the hottest books of the summer.

Learn More

This Month's New Releases

From heart-pounding thrillers to poignant memoirs and everything in
between, check out what's new this month.

Learn More

.

Thank you for signing up, fellow book lover!

Tell us what you like and we'll recommend books you'll love.

African American

Asian American

Audiobooks

Book Club

Biography & Autobiography

Business & Personal Finance

Children Ages 0-6

Children Ages 7-12

Christian

Cooking

Dystopian

eBooks

Entertainment & Pop Culture

Fantasy

Fiction

Graphic Novels

Historical Fiction

History

Horror

Indie Authors/Emerging Voices

Indigenous/Native American

Latinx/Hispanic

LitRPG

Mystery

Poetry

Politics

Romance

Romantasy/Dark Romance/Urban Romance

Science Fiction

Self-help

Sports

Teen

Thriller & Suspense

Your Lifestyle Digest

Spanish Language Books/Libros en Español

See More Categories

Your First Name

Birth Month

Select MonthJanuary February March April May June July August September
October November December

Zip Code

State

Select StateAlabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado
Connecticut Delaware District of Columbia Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho
Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland
Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska
Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North
Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina
South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West
Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming

Thank you!

Your registration is complete.

Close

About Simon & Schuster

- Corporate Information
- Divisions & Imprints
- Press Releases
- Careers
- Social Impact
- Our Mission Statement
- Compliance Reports

International Sites

- Australia
- Canada
- India
- United Kingdom

Connect with Simon & Schuster

- []
- 
  []
- []
- []

Resources

- For Educators and Librarians
- For Booksellers & Distributors
- Distribution Services
- Simon & Schuster Speakers Bureau
- Archway Publishing
- Email Preferences
- Book Festival Resources

Help

- Avoid Publishing Scams
- Order Status
- Return a Product
- Help/FAQ
- Report Piracy
- Manuscript Submissions

By clicking 'Sign me up' I agree to the Terms of Use and acknowledge the
Privacy Policy and Notice of Financial Incentive. Free ebook offer
available to NEW US subscribers only. Offer redeemable at Simon &
Schuster's ebook fulfillment partner. Must redeem within 90 days. See
full terms and conditions and this month's choices.

More from Simon & Schuster

- Book Club Favorites
- Books Like Us
- Everything.com
- Halo Books
- History in Five
- Pimsleur
- Simon Teen
- Star Trek Books
- The Write Reasons Podcast
- Your Lifestyle Digest

- Privacy Policy

- Terms of Use

- Your Privacy Choices []

- Cookie Preferences

- California Notice

© 2026 Simon & Schuster, LLC. All rights reserved.

BACK TO TOP
