         Minutes of the meeting of the South Bank Colleges Board
              held at 4.00pm on Wednesday, 20 November 2024
            in Board room, Clapham campus, Gateway College

Present
Ruth Farwell (Chair)
Sue Dare (Vice Chair) - online
Steve Balmont
Nigel Duckers
Issa Issa
Thesia Kouloungou
Mee Ling Ng
David Phoenix

Apologies
Nyla-Rae Graham

In attendance
Sam Curtis
Chris Knell
Monica Marongiu
Fiona Morey
Jacqueline Mutibwa
Wayne Wright
Henry Robson, SU Vice President

1.    Welcome and apologies

      The Chair welcomed the trustees to the meeting. The Chair also welcomed Henry
      Robson, SU Vice President who was attending the meeting in the absence of Nyla-
      Rae Graham the SU President. The above apologies were noted.

      The Board had just had an engagement activity with students and staff (link
      governors with senior leadership team initiative). The Board also had a closed
      meeting with the independent trustees of the Board (separate minutes).

2.    Declaration of Interests

      Mee Ling Ng declared an interest in agenda item 16 on the update on recruitment of
      trustees and would not participate in the discussion.

3.    Minutes of the previous meeting

      The Board approved the minutes of the meeting held on 26 September 2024 as an
      accurate record and their publication, as redacted.

4.    Matters arising

      The Board noted the update on matters arising from the previous meetings and that
      most actions were on the agenda of the meeting or had been completed. The
      outstanding actions would be actioned following the meeting.

                                           1
     A high-level directors accountability chart (distinction between the responsibility of
     LSBU Board and SBC Board) along with SBC’s regulatory framework and the role
     of the company secretary and governance professional would be presented to the
     Board at its next meeting in March 2025. The action from the Accounting Officer’s
     report would be redacted.

     The Curriculum Plan for Phase 2 Scheme

     The Board noted the curriculum plan for the Phase 2 scheme which would support
     not building Block D. The plan had been further reviewed by the project working
     group prior to submission to the DfE for approval.

5.   Update from the Students’ Union Vice President

     The Students’ Union (SU) Vice President gave a report on the recent activities
     undertaken by the SU and upcoming activities. The 2024/25 academic year
     Freshers events were successful; well attended with positive feedback from
     students.

     Anti-bullying awareness week was held during 11-15 November 2024 with events to
     raise awareness against bullying and to promote a safe and supportive environment
     for all students.

     Student Voice, the Course Representative meetings were held on 12 & 13
     November 2024. The meetings were well attended, and student feedback was
     positive. There were issues raised about heating at Clapham Campus, toilets
     needed deep cleaning to improve hygiene standards, and the presentation of
     canteen menus needed to be improved. There was also a meeting with the
     Curriculum Heads for students to give feedback on their course and raise any
     concerns.

     Upcoming events included Personal Safety month (November), First Aid training
     and initiatives to market SU and enhance its visibility across the two campuses.

     The Chair thanked Henry Robson for the comprehensive report. She noted that the
     students’ concerns in the report were similar to those raised at the student
     engagement activity held before the meeting. SU would work with the College’s
     Executive to address the matters. Issa Issa would have a discussion outside the
     meeting with the SU about student welfare matters and on the knife campaign.

6.   Executive Principal's Report (SAR 2023/24, Safeguarding matters, HR KPIs,
     LSBTC, LGC reports)

     The Board noted the key matters since its last meeting in September 2024.

     •   2023/24 final achievement data. Overall achievement was 87.1% an
         improvement (2.2%) compared to the previous year and above both the national
         and provider group average. 16-19yrs was 84.3% and Adults was 88.1%. The
         three-year improving trend and the significant reduction in the achievement gaps
         by ethnicity and gender in 2023/24 was noted. Creative and Digital programmes

                                             2
    had performed significantly below national average. The overall retention rate
    was 94.6% an improvement compared to the previous years and above both the
    national and provider group.

•   2023/24 apprenticeships achievement. Performance was still low at 31% below
    national average of 55% and 45% target agreed with the DfE and there was a
    risk to the provision. The provision was currently being reviewed by the Further
    Education Commission (20 & 21 November 2024) and a verbal report would be
    provided at the meeting under agenda item 7. The outcome report would be
    shared with trustees as soon as it was available. 2024/25 performance showed
    improvements in retention, employer engagement and predicted achievement
    was positive.

•   2023/24 attendance performance. The overall attendance was 80% against a
    target of 90%. Year to date attendance was 83.3%, an improvement across all
    subjects due to the interventions put in place last year though there was still
    more work that needed to be done.

•   2024/25 recruitment update post 42 days. 16-19 year olds (ESFA) current
    figures were positive and above budget target and funding allocation and was
    expected to be higher with in-year recruitment. On adult recruitment, there was a
    risk that the budget target may not be achieved, and work was underway to
    increase the offer of the courses. Growth on T levels, Level 4 and
    apprenticeship was still low.

•   an update on the further integration of the SBC HR team into the LSBU group
    HR team following their change of location. The work being undertaken on
    curriculum planning, staff utilisation, staff structure review including agency staff
    and initiatives on staff recruitment and retention was noted. Staff recruitment
    remained a significant challenge in terms of course offer, quality, staff costs and
    meeting local needs. There was also work being done on developing the group
    HR team’s culture, identity and values.

•   an update on Safeguarding and Prevent matters for term 1 2024/25 and the
    initiatives and activities that had been undertaken to promote and support
    safeguarding and welfare at SBC. Year to date there were 73 safeguarding
    disclosures, 44 low level concerns and no prevent cases. The two serious
    incidents at Nine Elms and Clapham and the actions taken to address the matter
    including the students bag searches were noted.
Self-Assessment Report (SAR) 2023/24

The Board discussed the draft SAR 2023/24. The document had been reviewed by
an Ofsted inspector, the Chair of the Board and the Chair of the Quality and
Improvement Committee at a validation meeting. The draft SAR had also been
discussed in detail at the last Quality and Improvement Committee meeting on 28
October 2024. The overall effectiveness of the College continued to be self-
assessed as ‘Good’, with most areas assessed as good. One area, apprentices was


                                         3
     assessed as requires improvement. The draft SAR needed to be updated with the
     data and information that was discussed at the board meeting.

     The updated 2024/25 Quality Improvement Plan (QIP), which would address the
     areas for improvement identified in the SAR 2023/24, was being developed. The
     updated SAR and QIP would be circulated to trustees for approval as soon as
     possible.

     Update on HR Matters

     The Board received a report on SBC’s performance against HR KPIs as at 31
     October 2024. The key risks were staff turnover, sickness levels and recruitment
     and the actions that were being undertaken to address the matters were noted.
     The Bradford Factor, an absence KPI, would be included in future reports.

     The Board noted the College’s Level 3 and 4 graduation ceremony at the Royal
     Festival Hall in October 2024. The event included the College’s first Honorary
     Fellowship which was awarded to Professor Jason Arday, the youngest Black
     professor at the University of Cambridge. The update reports on LSBTC and LGC
     were noted.

7.   Further Education Commissioner (FEC) Visit (Confidential)

     The Board received a verbal report which was confidential at this stage of the FEC
     visit.

8.   Accounting Officer’s Report

     The Board discussed the key matters since its last meeting in September 2024.

     Update on the IFM contract performance

     There were some teething issues at the start of the contract, but it was generally
     progressing well with improvement across all services. The LSBU group team
     would continue to monitor Mitie’s performance to ensure that it meets SBC’s
     required KPIs. The IFM contract had been extended to SBA.


     Cyber Security Incident at South Bank Colleges

     The Accounting Officer informed the Board about a significant cyber incident that
     might have started on 16 November 2024. Students and learners had raised the
     matter and there were concerns about potential safeguarding issues. Cyber security
     specialists had been engaged to investigate and address the risk. The Board would
     be provided with an update as soon as possible and also kept updated on the
     matter.

     2024/25 Staff Pay Award

     The Association of Colleges (AoC) recommended a staff pay award of 2.5% if
     affordable by the college. A 2% staff uplift had been included in the 2024/25 budget

                                           4
     and the additional 0.5% (£115K) was affordable. The Board supported the AoC
     recommendation and approved the 2.5% pay award for all SBC staff (back dated to
     August 2024 and payment in December 2024/January 2025). The increase in the
     London Living Wage would also be implemented across the group.

9.   Vice Principal Finance & Performance Report

     The Board discussed the 2023/24 year-end financial position and 2024/25 budget
     performance.

     The Board discussed:

     •   the draft 2023/24 year-end financial position had not been finalised due to the
         delayed RSM’s external audit report because of the report from the ESFA
         funding audit was still awaited. SBC had been granted a one-month extension
         to its accounts submission deadline by its regulators OfS and ESFA.

     •   the draft 2023/24 year-end financial position showed a £575K adverse variance
         (and not £200K as reported in September) to the 2023/24 budget (£1.3m
         budgeted operating deficit). The year-end operational deficit was expected to be
         approx. £1.9m. The variance was due to an increase in total expenditure mainly
         related to staff costs some of which had been carried forward from the previous
         year. The weakness of the cut-off accounting procedures was noted. The
         actions to prevent reoccurrence of the year end issues experienced were also
         noted and had been considered by the Audit Committee at its meeting in
         November 2024. The Board was concerned about the draft 2023/24 year-end
         financial position as the agreed budget had not been achieved.

     •   the year to date position as at 31 October 2024 (period 3) which showed a
         £744K surplus against budget, the full year forecast showed that the budgeted
         break-even operating position before pensions would be achieved.

     •   the key risk to achieving the forecast was the funding for the student growth and
         the associated agency staff costs. The work being undertaken to mitigate the
         risk was noted. An explanatory note on the support staff would be provided in
         the report such as the Additional Learning Support (ALS).

     •   the cash flow position remained an area of concern which was mainly due to the
         capital programme as a result of the delayed land sale proceeds.

     The Board was concerned about the overspend on staffing costs and associated
     controls. The proposed Task & Finish group would scrutinise the financial
     performance in detail, consider the 2024/25 efficiency savings (via growth and cost
     saving) needed to bring the budget position back on track to the agreed budget
     position, analyse the budget risks especially the staffing costs and the mitigation
     plan to address them. The monthly management accounts would be circulated to
     trustees (outside formal meetings) for scrutiny in order to have a better
     understanding and monitoring of the financial situation.

     The annual board development programme would include a session on FE funding
     and financial management.

                                            5
10.   2024/25 Updated Financial Regulations

      The Board discussed the updated financial regulations, which had been discussed
      in detail and recommended to the Board for approval by the Audit Committee on 5
      November 2024.

      The Board approved the proposed amendments to appendix A:

      •   section 3 on Authorisation of Contracts and Orders - to split budget holder
          approval into a £5k limit and a £20k limit based upon their seniority of their role
          and explicitly include the requirement to refer to the Vice Principal when an
          approval would exceed their budget allocation. All purchases between £20,000
          and £250,00 require two approvers.

      •   section 4 on Leasing and Hire Purchase Commitments - all leasing and hire
          purchase approvals are undertaken by the Executive Principal, Vice Principal
          Finance and Performance or Board. All purchases require two approvers.
      The Board approved the 2024/25 updated financial regulations.

11.   2023/24 External Governance Review Recommendations – Report from the
      SBC Board Task & Finish group

      The Chair of the Task & Finish group presented the report on the review of
      Rockborn’s external governance review recommendations.

      On the recommendation to review arrangements to enhance the frequency and
      rigour of financial oversight, scrutiny and planning, including the potential
      development of a committee for this purpose (rec. 5), the Board agreed that
      trustees financial oversight needed to be enhanced and that a Task & Finish group
      as required would be established to consider financial situations that may arise.

      The SBC’s regulatory framework to clarify which DfE and other government
      regulation SBC is required to comply with (rec 8) would be updated and also reflect
      the LSBU group structure.

      The Board approved the external governance review recommendations made by
      Rockborn following the review carried out by the SBC Board Task & Finish group.

      The Board noted the post review actions that would be undertaken. The updated
      2025 board effectiveness review action plan (which will include the current 2022
      actions) would be presented to the Board at its meeting in March 2025.

12.   LSBU Group Environmental Sustainability report

      The report was not available at the meeting and would be considered at the next
      meeting in March 2025.

13.   Anti Modern Slavery Statement

      The Board noted that the LSBU Group must publish an annual statement setting out
      the steps taken to prevent modern slavery in their business and their supply chains,

                                              6
      a requirement under section 54 (Transparency in Supply Chains) of the Modern
      Slavery Act 2015.

      The Board approved the group Modern Slavery Act Statement for the period August
      2023 to July 2024 as endorsed by the SBC Audit Committee at its meeting on 5
      November 2024 and that it is signed off by the Vice-Chancellor as a nominated
      Director for the group.

14.   Updated Speak Up Policy

      The Board approved the updated group speak up policy which had been reviewed
      and endorsed by the SBC Audit Committee at its meeting on 5 November 2024.
      There were no changes recommended.

15.   Governance Update

      The Board noted an update on SBC governance arrangements. The Board:

      •   approved the updated meeting cycle and annual calendar.

      •   approved the cover report template.

      •   noted the direction of travel on the amalgamating of SBA and SBC Audit
          Committees.

      The updated meeting cycle would ensure that committee and working group
      minutes are made available to all trustees on a timely basis, to ensure transparency
      and regular information flow (external governance review recommendation 11).

16.   Update on Recruitment of Trustees

      The Board noted an update on the recruitment of trustees on the SBC Board. The
      Board:

      •   approved the six months extension to Mee Ling Ng’s 2nd term of office to 31
          July 2025 as a LSBU trustee on the SBC Board.

      •   noted the appointment of Nyla Rae Graham as the new student trustee from 7
          October 2024.

17.   Report from Committees

      The Board noted the report from Committee meetings held since the last meeting in
      September 2024.

18.   Any other business

      There would be two additional meetings this calendar year to approve 2023/24
      year-end approvals: Audit Committee on 3 December 2024 and Board meeting on
      10 December 2024. The meetings will be online.


                                            7
                                   Date of next meeting
                             4.00 pm on Tuesday, 4 March 2025


Confirmed as a true record




                                   (Chair)




                                             8
