     SEND & Inclusion Newsletter
                  6th July 2023
                                      |          Volume 18




                                    A message from the Director of SEND and
                                                  Inclusion




                                          Dear Colleagues

                              Firstly, I wanted to introduce myself to you all. I am the new Director of
                              Education and SEND – I am now at the end of my first full week back in
                              Hillingdon and I am looking forward to meeting lots of you over the next
                              few months. My background is that I was previously a Headteacher in a
                              neighbouring Borough and have been a SENCO for many years. I was
Contents                      previously the Head of Education and Learning for Hillingdon, and, prior to
                              my new role, I was a Director in Luton Borough Council, where I led on
                              Education and SEND.
1. Headlines &
   Deadlines                  The majority of my experience in SEND has been as a SENCO and school
                              leader so I am very aware of the challenges schools face with managing
2. SEND Advisory              SEND needs and the importance of the support from the Local Authority
                              when supporting our diverse range of needs.
   Service
3. SEND Advisory              As we approach the end of this academic year, I wanted to say a big thank
                              you to you all for your hard work and dedication in supporting children
   Service: Early Years       with SEND and your collaborative approach to working with the SEND
                              teams in Hillingdon. I am keen to understand over the coming months what
4. SEND Service               is working well and look for any further opportunities to support schools
5. Educational                with SEND moving forwards. Please do share any feedback with either the
                              SEND management team or myself as we are keen to look at ways we can
   Psychology Service         work together to ensure our SEND children have the best outcomes.
6. Training                   On a final note, I wanted to share a recent news article that truly inspired
7. Resources for              me. Jason Arday recently was in the press for becoming the youngest black
                              professor ever appointed to the University of Cambridge. Whilst this is an
   Schools and Parents        incredible achievement, the most amazing aspect of this story is that Jason
                              was diagnosed with global developmental delay and ASD and was non-
8. Hillingdon PCF             verbal until the age of 11. This story is an example of what our children can
9. Past Newsletters           achieve with the right support. It is key that we do not ever consider our
                              children to have a ceiling on what we think they can achieve, irrespective of
                              SEND needs. You can read more about Jason’s inspirational story in this
                              link.

                              I hope you all have a well-deserved rest over the summer holidays, and I
                              will look forward to working with you next year.

                              Kind regards

                              Abi Preston
                            Please click the circled boxLocal
                                                          on the Offer
                                                                 below image when completing a
                            referral Council would like to encourage every school and childcare
                            Hillingdon
                            setting in the borough to promote the Hillingdon Local Offer by including
                            the link in the SEND section of their website: SEND local offer - Hillingdon
                            Council
Updated                     Families’ Information Service would also like to attend your SEND coffee
                            mornings/afternoons to speak to parents about the Local Offer. If you
Government                  would like to invite a representative to your setting, please
                            email fis@hillindon.gov.uk or get in touch with the Hillingdon PCF (Parent
Guidance                    Carer Forum).
                            Families’ Information Service would like to hear your thoughts about the
                            SEND Local Offer. Please contact us with any feedback or suggestions.


IPSEA News Updates- March
2023


Free period product
scheme for schools and
colleges extended – 26th
November 2021

Department of Education -                         Dates for your Diary:
Green Paper – 2nd March
                                                           SENCO FORUM
2023
                                                      Location to be advised
                                       Schools: 20th September 2023 – 1.00pm-3.00pm
Keeping Children Safe in
                                     Early Years: 20th September 2023 – 9.30- 11.30am
Education – 6 June 2023

                                                  UNIVERSAL TRAINING
                                 Emotional wellbeing & self-care skills - Parent workshop,
                                   Support and strategies 13.07.2023 10-1pm CR4 sign up
                                Signalong 11.07.2023 10-12pm CR3a sign up


                                    Headteachers briefing - Language Link Secondary
                                               Tuesday 11th of July 3.30pm (virtual)
                                                Friday 14th of July 9.30am (virtual)


                                 Please contact clewis@hillingdon.gov.uk for more information
                                                       and Teams link




                                For more details on how to book on to training sessions please
                                see the 2022/23 Training Brochure and training posters within.
    SEND Advisory Service
SAS Panel
SAS panel is held every Thursday 10am- 11am, which looks at
ESF applications. Please allow more time in case we are
running over. If you have signed up to attend a
future panel we will email you to notify you of this.
Please see here for the list of 2022/23 panel dates and
submission cut off dates: SAS Panel Dates 2022/2023
                                                                                                 IMPORTANT
There are still spaces for SENCOs and PVI settings to sign up
                                                                                                 DOCUMENTS
to attend panel and contribute to the decision-making process.                             Please CTRL, click and save a copy
Please register your interest using this form:
                                                                                              MY SUPPORT PLAN
SAS Panel Registration of Interest
                                                                                              MSP Guidance and Advice
                                                                                                 MSP PDF Format
                                                                                                 MSP Word Format
                       SENCO FORUM
                                                                                                 Full One Page Profile
             The next Schools SENCO Forum is being held on

                            20th September 2023:                                                         ESF
                              From 1.00-3.00pm.                                                     ESF Guidance
         Please register using the following links: SENCO Forum                                 ESF Application Form
                      Registration September 2023
                                                                                               ESF Resubmission Form
     Registration will close at 12 on the Friday prior to the forum.
       Here are the slides and information from the May Forum                               Ordinarily Available Provision
                                                                                                      Document
                          SENCO Forum slides
                                                                                             Strategies Resource
                                                                                                    Bank
               Strategies Resource Bank                                                              Early Years

           A guide of strategies and resources to support                                          Schools/Post-16
                children and young people with SEN                                                   Key working
                                                                                              Transition Handover Sheet
                                                                                          Whole School SEND – Summary of
                                                                                                     free CDP
                                                                                           Whole School SEND – Resources

                                                                                                     Referrals
                                                                                          The SAS referral form is no longer
                                                                                            accepted. Please complete the
          Early Years            Parents/Carers Schools/Post-16                             referral through the Stronger
                                                                                                     Families Hub:

                  Early Identification Toolkit                                                Children Young People and
                                                                                               Families Online Service
we would like to introduce a strategic approach to early identification, in the form of           (hillingdon.gov.uk)
an Early Identification Toolkit. This will allow you to have clear markers on how to
approach identifying the main areas of needs, so that there is consistency, and you are
more well informed of what “is best practice”.
                                                                                              For more information about
Please find attached the Early Identification document,.                                  referrals and the Stronger Families
We would love to hear how you will use the toolkit and any ongoing feedback, please          Hub please see the Stronger
feel free to fill in the following form: https://forms.office.com/e/ApaG2bNUyK
                                                                                                     Families Flyer
Training - please contact mhasnain@hillingdon.gov.uk for any further questions.
                      SEND Advisory Service (Continued)
Threshold of Support - Updated Easy Read Versions!
Please find the 'Threshold of Support' documents here. This provides a consistent approach to supporting
the needs of the CYP across Hillingdon. We are currently compiling a toolkit (which is mentioned in these
documents) which will be shared with you.
                                                      SAS Localities List
HI 1:1 Threshold of Support for referrals
                                                      All successful applications for ESF will be assigned
MSI 1:1 Threshold of Support for referrals            a SEND Advisory Service advisor who will provide
SAS Schools/Post 16 1:1 Threshold of Support          support according to the Threshold of support.

SEND Key Working 1:1 Threshold of support             Please see list of linked advisors below:

VI 1:1 Threshold of Support for referrals             SAS Localities

PVI Threshold of Support



       SEND and Inclusion Funding and Referrals


   Referrals to Schools and EYs: As we are approaching the end of the summer term, any observations
   for new referrals submitted for School support and Early Years will most likely take place in the new
   academic year. Please contact your advisor or the SAS Advice line for general support in the interim. We
   would advise referrals to be made in the new academic year following a period of transition (approx. 6
   weeks). Please ensure all referral applications demonstrate the embedding of OAP strategies.
   ESF Impact form: A kind reminder to please complete the following form at the end of ESF Funding, to
   demonstrate the effectiveness of ESF over the last year. This form MUST be completed for your renewal
   applications to be considered. ESF Impact Form
   Funding Transfer/Cease Form: The following form should be completed for CYP who are in receipt of
   any of the following funding: Early Years Inclusion Fund, Early Support Funding, SEND Exceptional Funding
   or Early Years Access Fund, where funding needs to be ceased or transferred.




  A message from LBH Finance… Please share with your finance team
  We are pleased to announce that the LBH are introducing an exciting new payments system via our
  ContrOCC system to make payments to you, on a monthly basis for Early Support Funding (ESF). This
  will come into effect from September. This will only be for newly allocated ESFs, following the
  ContrOCC go live date. All other payments items, including existing ESFs will be paid through their
  current channels. We are confident that the new process will be easier for you to manage payments and
  ensure prompt payment is received. Please review the attachment and forward to your finance team.



 SAS Adviceline
 The Send Advisory Service continues to offer support to parents of children and young people with SEND
 and the professionals that work with these families via an advice line. We can help with resources/activities
 or just general advice during these uncertain times.


 Please print off and share with your parents and put a copy of the SAS Advice Line Poster in your
 staffroom.
   SEND Advisory Service: Early Years
  Early Years
  The next Early Years Forum is being held on Wednesday 20th September 2023 from 9.30 am to
  11.30am – location to be advised
  Please register using the following link: Early Years SENCO Forum Registration September 2023
  Registration will close at 12 noon on the Friday prior to the forum.
  Here are the slides and information from the March EY Forum
  SENCO Forum March 23 slides


  SEND Review
   A SEND review is an evidence based, self-evaluative tool which looks at how your education setting
   provides for pupils or students with special educational needs and disabilities. Existing good practice is
   identified and the findings from SEND reviews can help improve SEND provision and strategy, so that
   learners are appropriately supported to achieve good outcomes. Please sign up here for a SEND Review

  Childminders Information and support
  If you require any information, support and training for any child you have concerns please contact the Early
  Years Inclusion Team.
  Currently  the   person   to  contact  directly   is  Sandy             Atwal-    Principal   SEND Advisor
  email: SAtwal@hillingdon.gov.uk Work mobile: 07395246022

 SAS threshold of support
  Please find the Early Years 'Threshold of Support' document here. This provides a consistent approach to
  supporting the needs of the CYP across Hillingdon. We are currently compiling a toolkit (which is mentioned
  in these documents) which will be shared with you shortly: EY/PVIs 1:1 Threshold of Support for
  referrals



                              Early Years Inclusion Funding 2023-2024
     The last Early Years Inclusion Funding panel date for this academic year was 20th June 2023. Any
 applications made after the last submissions date (13th June 2023) will be seen in the new academic year.
  Please see the updated EYIF guidance which includes next academic year's panel dates and submission
                                               deadlines.
For all children who have received EYIF please complete the following form to demonstrate the impact and
              progress made at the end of their funding https://forms.office.com/e/Q67DH8KDfi


If you need to cease a child's EYIF funding due to the child moving/receiving other funding, please complete
                         the following form https://forms.office.com/r/sRtTmqPyRd


We hope the new EYIF process this year has allowed you to access funding more frequently and has had a
                             positive impact on the children you support.
   SEND Service
Annual Review Reports
Please ensure that all annual review
meetings take place and that the
outcomes include transition to the next
key stage of education and Planning for
Adulthood for students from Year 9.
                                            SEND Statutory Service Updates
Please note that Annual Review Reports
should now be sent to the dedicated         Consultations – Please ensure you are completing
email:                                      consultations and returning within the 15 days. A gentle
                                            reminder these are shared with parents, and you must
senannualreviews@hillingdon.gov.uk          consider all reasonable adjustments and support to make a
                                            placement successful rather than a refusal. Parental preference
EHC Assessments
                                            is a high threshold.
Please remember to send EHC Needs
                                            SEND Panel
Assessment requests electronically
to:                                         To attend SEND panel (every Wednesday 1pm virtually) please
                                            book a place via email: echallis@hillingdon.gov.uk
Please use Stronger Families Hub to
request a statutory assessment.             Staff changes - Please note that we have new interim officers
(sendadmin@hillingdon.gov.uk) has           covering vacancies until permanent roles are fulfilled. Please
been deactivated                            see SEND caseload school allocation.
and not to sasinclusion@hillingdon.g        SEND Team Managers:
ov.uk
                                            Please note that the Primary Team has a new manager Primary
Please attach the EHC needs                 Team (until Year 8) Danielle Roberts
assessment application template from:       droberts2@hillingdon.gov.uk
Information for SEND professionals -
Hillingdon Council referring through:       Secondary Team (from Year 9)
https://www.hillingdon.gov.uk/stronger-     Sonal Sisodia ssisodia@hillingdon.gov.uk
families.
                                            Highlight on placements
Please note that the form is being
                                            We understand there are some pupils who may require a
redesigned therefore for EHCNA you do
                                            specialist placement attending your setting – and due to the
not need to fill in all the information
                                            national shortage, one is not available. We consult a range of
related to social care questions if you
                                            settings, in and out of borough, independent and maintained
feel it’s not relevant, however please
                                            but we need to ensure whatever placement is sought is an
ensure you attach the EHCNA request
                                            efficient use of resource. Please continue to advise families to
form and all evidence related to the
                                            contact SENDIAS for impartial support.
request (including costed provision map
and relevant reports).                      SEND caseload school allocation.

If you are a parent/ Young Person or        For SEND Team contact details please click here
supporting a family and would like to
                                            SEND Placement Consultation
make a referral, please contact: Email:
strongerfamilieshub@hillingdon.gov           SEND Tribunals
.uk Phone: 01895 556 006.                    If you are involved in SEND Tribunal proceeding, please note that it is in the
                                             school’s best interest to attend the hearing as a witness for LA or parent/carer
Please note that we will accept an email     in order to avoid being ordered by Tribunal to attend on the day of the
from a parent as consent to carry out an     hearing. This is causing delays and further challenges in cases. If you have any
assessment and to share information.         queries, please liaise with your allocated SEND Officer and/or you can contact
                                             us on sentribunals@hillingdon.gov.uk.
with other services if they are unable to


                                            Mediations: Please note that If there is new evidence that
                                            was not presented at SEND Panel and you can provide this
                                            additional information to support the request for EHCNA, you
                                            can simply re-submit the request rather than going via
                                            Mediation.
 Educational Psychology Service

Educational Psychology Service - TIME TO MAKE REQUESTS FOR THE EP TRADED SERVICE FOR
                                   NEXT YEAR 2023-2024



  Unbelievably, it is the time of year when we need to ask schools to consider how may EP traded days they would
like to purchase for next academic year 2023-2024. Please consider the amount of time you need for the entire year
              and contact educationalpsychologyservice@hillingdon.gov.uk to register this interest.



Being early with requests helps us to fulfil your wishes. Please specify if you have an existing relationship with an EP
which you would like to maintain where possible going forward, we will generally be reverting back to one LINK EP
                                                      per school.
                Should you have any specific enquiries about the traded service, please don’t
                                          hesitate to contact us by email




                  Hillingdon Educational Psychology Service Traded EP Offer 2022/2023




                                           Educational Psychology Service
                                               Principal Melanie Adkins
       Senior EP Ingrida Stankeviciene                                  Senior EP Subha Samuel
       EP Cynthia Pinto                                                 EP Charlene Ramos
       EP Shevaun Taylor                                                EP Helen Vogt
       EP Louise Stevenson                                              EP Jenny Vagas
       EP Alysha Collins                                                Assistant EP Alba Barbullushi
       Trainee EP Zoe Price                                             Trainee EP Sharron Mangum
       Trainee EP Michele Estwick                                       Trainee EP Christopher Quinton




                                         ALL OTHER EPS QUERIES

   If you have any further queries regarding the service, please do contact us
   Email: educationalpsychologyservice@hillingdon.gov.uk
   Tel: 01895 558101  SEND and Inclusion Training
   ‘Thank you for all your hard work and commitment supporting the children and families of Hillingdon. ’
               NASEN – Whole school Teacher Handbook

          This handbook has been developed as a resource for teachers to use over time as
          they embed inclusive practice in their classrooms: it is not intended that it is read
          cover-to-cover. It has been written for both primary, secondary and specialist
          colleagues: teaching assistants, teachers, senior leaders and headteachers. The
          handbook includes whole-school and whole-class approaches as well as subject-
          specific and condition-specific guidance.


          Please access the handbook here




                        NASEN – Preparing for Adulthood
Preparation for Adulthood from the Earliest Years
It has been nearly nine years since the ideas around Preparing for Adulthood from the Early Years (PfAEY)
emerged and the expectations on schools to prepare all young people for adult life through personal
development have grown in that time.
Preparing for Adulthood is what all schools do for all young people – but that offer is not always drawn
together and recognised. Our refreshed ‘Preparing for Adulthood from the Earliest Years’ Review Guide
was trialled with schools in Oxfordshire who found that taking part in the process resulted in:
   •   A clear focus and drive for school improvement
   •   More widely shared expertise and good practice
   •   Better understanding of the rationale of PfAEY
   •   A clear and strategic vision for embedding PfAEY
   •   A named PfAEY governor.
As part of the Universal SEND Services programme, we will be recruiting 80 nursery, primary, secondary
and school sixth form settings to carry out a review in the Autumn term of 2023. Settings will receive
training and support to carry out the review and will be encouraged to produce an analysis report and
action plan. Participating schools will also have an opportunity to cascade PfAEY training and support to a
partner school the following year.
To find out more about what's involved, you can read a new blog from Regional SEND Leader, Becky
Jones, in which she talks about her own experience of carrying out a PfAEY review as part of the
Oxfordshire trial.
If you would like to be considered as a participant, please register your interest today so that we can
contact you about next steps in the process.
                      Spotlight Trainings
Please click under the flyer and ‘open’ or go through the brochure to sign up!




                     Attention Hillingdon

             2 Day Level 1 Attention Hillingdon
             25 Spaces…September 2023


             Attention Hillingdon is an 8-week Programme
             to support children’s attention & listening
             skills.
             This course for anyone who is new to Attention
             Hillingdon and want to understand the delivery model.

             Please sign up here




                                                   More information and sign up here
                                                          Please click here to sign up
Sign up for July Training here
Autism Reality Experience
     Autism Reality Experience Training (ARE)

     Venue TBC

     Cost: FREE

     This exciting workshop gives delegates an experience of what it is like to have Autism and
     then an in-depth teaching session that helps delegates to really improve
     knowledge. Delegates will be able to use their own experiences going through the Autism
     Reality Experience to build greater empathy and understanding for what it might be like
     for autistic people they know, which will in turn help them to come up with simple yet
     transformative changes to make the world a more inclusive place for all.

     Delivered on a mobile simulator, the ARE can have up to a maximum of 12 delegates
     per course, delivered up to a 3-hour period and 2 x courses per day, this means a
     maximum of 24 delegates per day. More information can be found here:

     Autism Reality Experience (ARE) - Training 2 Care UK Ltd

     (ignore prices shown on website as we are not charging for this experience)

     As this experience may be oversubscribed, we will be giving priority to schools / settings
     that have had / signed up for the Inclusion Commitment or SEND review. If you have not
     had your Supported SEND Review yet, more information can be found here:
     Please see Inclusion Commitment brochure and SEND Review information - if interested
     please contact sgill@hillingdon.gov.uk

                             Please sign up here
                                 or use the QR code below


                                                                 Dates and Times
                                                                   28th September
                                                                 Session 1 – 10am-1pm
                                                              Session 2 1.30pm – 4.30pm



                                                                   29th September
                                                                Session 3 – 10am – 1pm
                                                              Session 4 1.30pm – 4.30pm
                                                         These are repeated sessions and you
                                                            will only be able to attend one
                                                                        session
                                     Investment in Internships

   The Department for Education (DfE) has announced the Internships Work consortium and the British Association
   of Supported Employment (BASE) as the chosen delivery partners for an £18 million investment in the Supported
                                             Internships programme.

     The new Internships Work programme will deliver on a commitment set out in the SEND and AP green paper.

   The Internships Work programme includes the National Development Team for Inclusion (NDTi), BASE, and DFN
   Project SEARCH. It will work closely with local authorities to double the number of supported internships by 2025,
         engaging with employers and young people to level up the quality of Supported Internships across the
                                                      programme.

                   You can read more about Internships Work and BASE by visiting their websites.



                                               Autism Exclusions
The Department for Education is funding the School Exclusions service through the AET, to
provide information and advice to parents, when an autistic child or young person is excluded from
school, or is at risk of exclusion; and to support professionals in early intervention strategies and
good
practice to avoid the need for exclusions. The website contains guidance but also how to access the
AET exclusion service. https://www.autismeducationtrust.org.uk/exclusions

The SEND Advisory Service (SAS), at Hillingdon, provide person-centred support for children and
young people who are thought to have emerging SEND. Please don’t wait until exclusion feels like
the
only option. Early Intervention is paramount. We offer a wide array of universal and targeted
training,and 1:1 referrals can be made through the Stronger Families Hub. Stronger Families –
Hillingdon Council




                                  SEND Family Support Groups and Clubs
        The SEND Family Support Summer Funday is taking place on 02/07/23 from 1pm – 4pm
                      at Oak Wood School – please see this flyer for more information.
                               Here are flyers for the regular clubs and groups:
                              Activity Clubs    Parents Groups           Saturday Groups




   The Parenting Apart Programme                           HILLINGDON CHILDREN’S INTEGRATED THERAPY
                                                                            SERVICE
      The programme offers a supportive                                      Training
environment in which parents can communicate                   The Children’s Integrated Therapy Service (CITS) offer online training sessions for
      forming a respectful parent working                    professionals and setting staff over two fortnight periods per year. These are currently
                                                                                          held in May and November.
                  relationship.
                                                             Where possible recordings are made of training sessions, and you can find
      Click here for more information                                              these through the link below

                                                                                 Training: Click here for more information
                                                                                  Referring: Click here for more information
Hillingdon PCF




   Please use this link to see all the latest information from the Hillingdon PCF

                               PCF DOCUMENT
        LOCAL AREA SEND INSPECTION
  Autism Awareness and Acceptance – Resources
  and Links
                “Good reads”
                       Framework
                      What is Autism?
                   A new
   Books for children     approach…
                      and young people with ASD.docx                  Hillingdon Talks, Moves, Plays –
                                                                    Children's Integrated Therapy Service
                                                                                    (CITS)
                                                                   In 2019, CNWL launched Hillingdon Talks,
                                                                     Moves, Plays, the Children’s Integrated
                                                                   Therapy Service (CITS). Including a team of
        Premature CYP in nursery and schools
                                                                     specialised therapists, technicians and
  The impact of prematurity in child development within
                                                                    administrators, the service work together
  settings can have a significant impact on child
  development and learning. The Nottingham link is for a
                                                                   with children and young people aged 0 to
  free course, for staff, on understanding the impact of            19, their families and settings by offering
  prematurity which will affect approximately 1 in 10.                   assessment, training and advice.
  Bliss is the national prematurity charity, which provides
  support and advice for parents.                                        Click here for more information

  Link for training                                                                  Leaflet

                                                                                     Poster




         HILLINGDON CHILDREN’S INTEGRATED THERAPY SERVICE
                                Training

The Children’s Integrated Therapy Services (CITS) are running zoom training workshops for
education and early years staff once a week for 10 weeks.
      Please use this link to find out more information CITS Training Workshops
Please visit the Children’s Integrated Therapy Service website
www.cnwl.nhs.uk/children-integrated-therapy-service for information
about the service. This includes strategies and resources for parents
and professionals as well as links to other useful websites.


       Instagram      Facebook       Twitter     Website      LinkTree



    Colham Manor Children's Centres have launched its new Autism Parent Support Group (used to be
  called Friends of Early Birds). This group is run by parents, for parents and runs on the third Friday of
                                                  the month.
  Please find attached the poster with further details. This is currently a drop-in, with no need to book.
           Please share with any families you are working with that may find this group helpful.
    If you have any questions, please contact Laura Healy, Centre Manager lhealy@hillingdon.gov.uk

                                  www.hillingdon.gov.uk/childrenscentres
                                    An inspirational Story…

“I have just returned from the special Olympics where 170 countries and over 7000 athletes took part. Team GB
had 82 athletes taking part. My Nephew Ryan Griffin took part at 16 years of age he was the youngest Athlete on
           the Irish team. Ryan has Downs syndrome alongside this he has communication difficulties.


 Ryan first threw the Javelin in January when the family found out he had been selected for the Special Olympics
                in Berlin and the family is so proud that he won Silver in the World Special Olympics.


The amazing support from volunteers throughout the Olympics was outstanding. As a family the support for Ryan
 and the family throughout his life has been fantastic and shows what effective early intervention and the correct
                                      support can do to support achievement.”




                           Family Hubs/EY Nurseries Consultation for LA Education


Hillingdon Council is inviting children, young people, families, carers, partners, providers and community
organisations to have their say on its proposals to roll out a family hub model boroughwide and options for its early
years nurseries. Please use this link for further information: Final Family Hubs EY Nurseries Consultation
Useful Contacts
     Admissions - admissions@hillingdon.gov.uk or by telephone: 01895 558670.
     CLA support - Virtual School virtualschooladmin@jhillingdon.gov.uk
     Early Intervention and Prevention Key Work Service (incl. behaviour/
      exclusion) - Earlyinterventionaccess@hillingdon.gov.uk or by telephone: 01895 250858
     Early Years Advisory Teacher Team - earlyyears@hillingdon.gov.uk or by telephone:
      01895 277358
     Education Psychology - educationalpsychologyservice@hillingdon.gov.uk or by telephone:
      01895 250027
     Education Improvement Team – education@hillingdon.gov.uk
     Elective Home Education - admissions@hillingdon.gov.uk or by telephone: 01895 558670
     Finance - schoolfinancereturns@hillingdon.gov.uk or by telephone: 01895 277687
     Health and Safety general enquires - healthandsafetyadvisory@hillingdon.gov.uk or by
      telephone: 01895 250866
     Insurance Team - insuranceteam@hillingdon.gov.uk or by telephone: 01895 556131
     Learning & Development Support Team - learninganddevelopment@hillingdon.gov.uk or
      by telephone: 01895 277692
     Participation Key Work Team (school attendance, exclusions, children missing education,
      child performance licensing and work permits, post 16 participation),
      - participationteam@hillingdon.gov.uk or by telephone: 01895 250858.
     Safeguarding - Deputy (LADO) Hannah Ives, hives@hillingdon.gov.uk
     School Buildings Programme Co-ordinator
      - capitalprogrammeteam@hillingdon.gov.uk or by telephone: 01895 556097
     SEND Advisory Service
      sasinclusion@hillingdon.gov.uk
      saskeywork@hillingdon.gov.uk
      sassensory@hillingdon.gov.uk
     Special Educational Needs Team - strongerfamilies@hillingdon.gov.uk
     Special Educational Needs Information Advice and Support Service (SENDIASS) (for
      parents/ carers and young people - access to this service is via self-referral from
      parents/carers or young people) - sendiass@hillingdon.gov.uk or by telephone: 01895
      277001
   PAST NEWSLETTERS
   IF YOU ARE UNABLE TO FIND SOME OF THE OLDER DOCUMENTS IN THIS VOLUME OR HAVEN’T READ YET;
   PLEASE CLICK ON THE PREVIOUS NEWSLETTERS:

 January 2021 Newsletter
 01 March 2021 Newsletter
 31 March 2021 Newsletter
 April 2021 Newsletter
 May 2021 Newsletter
 July 2021 Newsletter
 September 2021 Newsletter
 October 2021 Newsletter
  November 2021 Newsletter
 December 2021 Newsletter
 January 2022 Newsletter
 February 2022 Newsletter
 March 2022 Newsletter
 May 2022 Newsletter
 September 2022 Newsletter
 November 2022 Newsletter
January 2023 Newsletter
March 2023 Newsletter
May 2023 Newsletter
