79
one exception, „Diez did not even attempt to look at the possible advantages of this
approach and decided to drop out of the study‟ (ibid: 119). She concludes that her „in-depth
reflective experience‟ (ibid: 123) brought her closer to student teachers both as a
professional and fellow teacher. Further, all student teachers‟ realised that success at
learning tennis with a tactical approach was contingent upon her success of learning to
teach with a new approach.
Emerging themes
Several recurrent themes emerge from the research studies, which sought to examine the
development of reflective practice in physical education student teachers. Strategies to
promote reflective practice were found to be effective in terms of changing the focus of
particular aspects of practice student teachers thought about, with one exception. The
capacity to engage in critical reflection was not realised by many student teachers
irrespective of whether they were year 2 elementary student teachers on a 14-week
university-based module (Gore) or those in years 3 and 4 following a secondary
programme which spanned two years (Macdonald and Brooker). Concerns over the
development of technical knowledge exceeded those which sought to engage and address
critical or sensitising goals and questions. Strategies to promote reflective practice were
found to be effective in terms of changing the way student teachers‟ think about their
practice with one exception. Evidence derived largely from reflective journals revealed
differences in their orientation or disposition to enquiry, as in Gore‟s recalcitrant student
teachers and the one student teacher that dropped out of a tennis course (Gubacs-Collins).
These two themes were recognised in several studies as potential barriers to student
teachers‟ growth and professional development. One additional issue raised by McCormack
concerns the difficulties some student teachers‟ experienced in journal writing skills. This
has implications when reflective journal entries form part of an assessment strategy.
Moreover, the question has been raised as to whether written artefacts appropriately
capture, and provide evidence of, student teachers‟ capacity to engage in reflective practice
(Moon, 1999).
Each of the studies encouraged student teachers to engage in reflective discourse with
others so that personal assumptions, beliefs, theories and perceptions could be made
transparent, open to critique and challenged, with a view to awakening student teachers to
alternative perspectives and new „ways of seeing‟. McCormack‟s reference to the increased
confidence, positive attitude and enjoyment of male student teachers on her dance course

