                                                                                 Hiraldo • 53


    The Role of Critical Race Theory in Higher Education

                                     Payne Hiraldo
            Despite the substantial impact race has in generating inequities in
            society and educational institutions, race continues to be untheorized
            (Ladson-Billings & Tate, 1995). Critical race theory (CRT) is an
            analytical framework that stems from the field of critical legal studies
            that addresses the racial inequities in society. This article provides an
            analysis of CRT in the context of diversity and inclusivity in higher
            education. In addition, this article also draws from the work and re-
            search done by critical race theorists who support the use of CRT in
            education reform and research.

In 1994, critical race theory (CRT) was first used as an analytical framework to
assess inequity in education (Decuir & Dixson, 2004; Ladson-Billings & Tate,
1995). Since then, scholars have used CRT as a framework to further analyze
and critique educational research and practice (Ladson-Billings, 2005). This ar-
ticle will further explore how the five tenets of CRT can be used to analyze the
different forms of social inequities reinforced through the institution of higher
education. First, I will provide an explanation of CRT. Second, I will discuss
how each CRT tenet contributes to inclusivity and diversity in higher education.
Third, I will address criticisms of CRT. Finally, I will share how CRT can further
benefit higher education.

                  An Historical Overview of Critical Race Theory

During the mid-1970s, CRT emerged from the early work of Derrick Bell and
Alan Freeman, who were discontent with the slow pace of racial reform in the
United States (Delgado, 1995; Ladson-Billings, 1998). According to Gordon
(1990), CRT originated from the critical legal studies (CLS) movement (as cited

Payne is the Assistant Residence Director for Jeanne Mance Trinity. She is currently a candi-
date for a M.Ed. in the Higher Education and Student Affairs Administration program at
the University of Vermont. Payne received her bachelor’s degree from Hampshire College, a
small private liberal arts institution in Amherst, Massachusetts. At Hampshire, Payne focused
on Latin@ identity formation, transnational migration with a particular focus on Latina
women in the United States. She also served as an intern for the Department of Residential
Life for three years. Payne will eventually pursue a Ph.D. with hopes of becoming faculty at a
small size institution. Her academic and professional interests include but are not limited to
critical race theory, identity formation, experiences of first generation and ALANA college
students at predominantly white institutions, immigration, and Freirean pedagogy.
54 • The Vermont Connection • 2010 • Volume 31


in Ladson-Billings), which failed to address the “effects of race and racism in U.S.
jurisprudence” (DeCuir & Dixson, 2004, p. 26). As a result, CRT analyzes the
role of race and racism in perpetuating social disparities between dominant and
marginalized racial groups (DeCuir & Dixson; Ladson-Billings; Ladson-Billings
& Tate, 1995). CRT’s purpose is to unearth what is taken for granted when ana-
lyzing race and privilege, as well as the profound patterns of exclusion that exist
in U.S. society (Parker & Villalpando, 2007). Therefore, CRT can play an impor-
tant role when higher education institutions work toward becoming more diverse
and inclusive. For example, in a predominantly White institution (PWI) simply
working toward increasing the amount of students of color enrolled is an insuf-
ficient goal if institutional change is a priority. Examining the campus climate
efforts to have culturally competent and diverse staff, faculty, and administrators
is a more effective way of becoming more diverse and inclusive. Fortunately, the
various tenets of CRT can be used to uncover the ingrained societal disparities
that support a system of privilege and oppression.

      The Relevance of the Five Tenets of CRT within Higher Education

CRT’s framework is comprised of the following five tenets: counter-storytelling;
the permanence of racism; Whiteness as property; interest conversion; and the
critique of liberalism (DeCuir & Dixson, 2004; Ladson-Billings, 1998; McCoy,
2006). Counter-storytelling is a framework that legitimizes the racial and subor-
dinate experiences of marginalized groups (DeCuir & Dixson; Ladson-Billings;
Parker & Villalpando, 2007). DeCuir and Dixson stated that counter-stories are
a resource that both expose and critique the dominant (male, White, hetero-
sexual) ideology, which perpetuates racial stereotypes. Counter-stories are per-
sonal, composite stories or narratives of people of color (Delgado Bernal &
Villalpando, 2002).

 The use of counter-stories in analyzing higher education’s climate provides fac-
ulty, staff, and students of color a voice to tell their narratives involving marginal-
ized experiences. Counter-stories can assist in analyzing the climate of a college
campus and provide opportunities for further research in the ways which an
institution can become inclusive and not simply superficially diverse. This goal is
important to keep in mind when institutions work toward creating a diverse col-
lege community. An institution can aim to increase the diversity of the campus by
increasing the number of students of color. However, if the institution does not
make the necessary changes to make the campus climate inclusive, the institution
will have a difficult time maintaining diversity. In many cases, counter-stories sup-
port the permanence of racism, which is the second tenet of CRT.

The permanence of racism suggests that racism controls the political, social,
and economic realms of U.S. society. In CRT, racism is seen as an inherent part
                                                                      Hiraldo • 55


of American civilization, privileging White individuals over people of color in
most areas of life, including education (DeCuir & Dixson, 2004; Delgado, 1995;
Ladson-Billings, 1998; Ladson-Billings & Tate, 1995). In higher education, rac-
ism may be analyzed through a lens that examines the structural impact. When
higher education ignores the existence of systematic racism, diversity action
plans become ineffective (Iverson, 2007). Instead, these initiatives work to pro-
pel and reinforce structural and institutional racism (Ladson-Billings & Tate).
Therefore, it is important to consider how well intended institutional processes
and procedures can potentially promote racism when working toward improving
an institution’s plan for diversity and inclusion.

The third tenet of CRT is Whiteness as property. Due to the embedded racism
in American society, Whiteness can be considered a property interest (DeCuir &
Dixson, 2004). As a result, this notion operates on different levels. These include
the right of possession, the right to use and enjoyment, the right to disposition,
and the right of exclusion (DeCuir & Dixson; Ladson-Billings & Tate, 1995;
Ladson-Billings, 1998). Historically, the idea of Whiteness as property has been
perpetuated as an asset that only White individuals can possess (Ladson-Billings
& Tate). During enslavement, African men, women, and children were objecti-
fied as property (Ladson-Billings). This historic system of ownership and the
reverberations from it further reinforce and perpetuate the system of White su-
premacy because only White individuals can benefit from it.

Particularly in higher education, the division between student affairs and aca-
demic affairs perpetuates the notion of race as property rights (Patton, McE-
wen, Rendón, & Howard-Hamilton, 2007). This is evident when research shows
how the majority of African Americans who earn their Ph.D. in education earn
them in education administration, therefore continuing as practitioners and rarely
becoming faculty (Ladson-Billings, 1998). As a result, the majority of African
Americans do not become part of the driving force in higher education: faculty.
Professors are seen as owners of the curriculum. Therefore, they have the au-
tonomy of designing courses according to their own understanding of their phi-
losophy of knowledge, which can work against students of color (Patton et al.).
This institutional power further reinforces the notion that being White is more
valuable and important than being a person of color (Patton et al.).

This systemic reality works against building a diverse and inclusive higher educa-
tion environment because it supports the imbedded hierarchical racist paradigms
that currently exist in our society. Diversity tends to be more visible within divi-
sions of students affairs, although the power of the institution tends to be cen-
tralized within academic affairs where there is less representation of women and
people of color (Patton et al., 2007).
56 • The Vermont Connection • 2010 • Volume 31


Interest convergence is the fourth tenet of CRT. This tenet acknowledges White
individuals as being the primary beneficiaries of civil rights legislation (Ladson-
Billings, 1998; DeCuir & Dixson, 2004; McCoy, 2006). DeCuir and Dixson ar-
gued, “early civil rights legislation provided only basic rights to African Ameri-
cans, rights that had been enjoyed by White individuals for centuries. These civil
rights gains were in effect superficial ‘opportunities’ because they were basic
tenets of U.S. democracy” (p. 28). An example of this is affirmative action. Al-
though under constant attack as a benefit for people of color, research shows
that the major recipients have been White women (Ladson-Billings). Ladson-
Billings argued that because White women potentially support households where
White men and children live, affirmative action ultimately benefits White indi-
viduals in general. Therefore, White individuals benefit from a structure that was
initially implemented to offer equal opportunity to people of color.

Diversity initiatives provide another example of White individuals being the pri-
mary beneficiaries of civil rights legislation. Recruitment efforts at PWIs can be
seen as a form of interest convergence. Given that many international students
do not qualify for financial aid according to U.S. regulations, institutions place
strong efforts in recruiting students of color who have the financial means to pay
for their education. Colleges and universities benefit financially from bringing
international diversity to their institution. Further, their student bodies become
more cultured at the expense of the international students, while the insitutions’
rankings may increase.

The fifth tenet of CRT, critique of liberalism, stems from the ideas of color-
blindness, the neutrality of the law, and equal opportunity for all (DeCuir &
Dixson, 2004). However, when analyzing the role of racism within U.S. society:

    Whereby rights and opportunities were both conferred and withheld based
    almost exclusively on race, the idea that the law is indeed colorblind and
    neutral is insufficient (and many would argue disingenuous) to redress its
    deleterious effects. Furthermore, the notion of colorblindness fails to take
    into consideration the persistence and permanence of racism and the con-
    struction of people of color as Other. (p. 29)

Colorblindness is a mechanism that allows people to ignore racist policies that
perpetuate social inequity (DeCuir & Dixson, 1999).

The lack of inclusivity in the academic curriculum (Ladson-Billings, 1998) and
student development theory used by student affairs professionals (Patton et al.,
2007) supports the notion of colorblindness that works against dismantling so-
cial inequities. In order to take a closer step towards eradicating racism on college
campuses, student and academic affairs need to incorporate dialogues around
                                                                     Hiraldo • 57


race throughout the curriculum and student activities (Patton et al.). Institutions
of higher education must recognize and work toward dismantling colorblind
policies (Iverson, 2007).

                                Criticism of CRT

CRT can play a key role in revealing the social inequities that exist within the
structure of higher education. Although many scholars like Villalpando and Del-
gado have subscribed to the framework of analysis of CRT, the academy still
approaches it with apprehension. One could argue that this criticism is due to
the perspective that CRT takes on racism. Thinking about racism as a funda-
mental part of U.S. societal structure is unsettling when many people are trying
to dismantle and work against it. However, doing so is a necessary step that
society needs to take in order for society to progress. By acknowledging racism,
members of American society could recognize initiatives made by the govern-
ment as improving the lives of people of color, but still benefiting the dominant.
Examples of these programs include affirmative action, study abroad programs,
and diversity initiatives. CRT also provides a voice to the people who have been
systematically oppressed (DeCuir & Dixson, 2004). This is unlike other theories
that analyze systemic oppression.

Critics claim that CRT does not include social class and gender as part of its
framework due to its focus on race. However, CRT scholars work to address the
intersectionality of race and other social identities within their analysis (DeCuir
& Dixson, 2004; Patton et al., 2007). One cannot simply think about race, class,
sexuality or gender independent from one another. Acknowledging how these
various identities are interrelated furthers the complexity of these social con-
structions, which, if ignored, leaves questions unanswered. For example, what
happens when thinking about social experiences? What happens when these
various identities do not align with social norms? Essentially CRT places race at
the center of the paradigm; however this does not necessarily mean that other
identities are ignored.

                                   Conclusion

Since the introduction of CRT in education, limited progress has been made,
partly because CRT is relatively new and many scholars when using CRT only
focus on the two tenets of counter-storytelling and permanence of racism (De-
Cuir & Dixson, 2004; Ladson-Billings, 2005). Although these tenets are very im-
portant:

    [T]he contributions do not capture all that CRT has to offer...it is essential
    that we utilize the full power of CRT, including Whiteness as property, in-
58 • The Vermont Connection • 2010 • Volume 31


    terest conversion, and the critique of liberalism. (DeCuir & Dixson, p. 30)
Through the use of all tenets of CRT, researchers are able to unmask and un-
cover the reinforcement of White supremacy (DeCuir & Dixson).

Patton et al. (2007) recommended incorporating critical race perspectives in daily
practices within education. Doing so brings awareness about the role of race in
producing racial inequities. As a result, faculty, student affairs professionals, and
institutional administrators should be aware of the rooted racism in educational
settings and acknowledge the systemic complexities that further disadvantage
students of color (DeCuir & Dixson, 2004; Patton et al.). Reflecting on how cam-
pus leaders incorporate racial perspectives in the academy through the construc-
tion of the curriculum, diversity initiatives, and institutional policies is essential to
the progress of higher education’s relationship with racial equality.

Many hope that CRT can be used as a reference for institutions striving to be-
come more inclusive through changes in diversity initiatives, infrastructure of
institutions, and analysis of hostile environments. When thinking about these
possible changes it is important for administrators to ask themselves how these
potential changes continue to promote a racist structure. It is important to utilize
CRT’s five tenets to help reveal racial inequity. Given that all five tenets address
different, yet interconnected themes, they help unearth the various ways in which
institutions reinforce racism. In addition, it is necessary for academic and student
affairs to work collaboratively. If both sides of the institution do not work to-
gether in making the institution more inclusive, all the work will be done in vain.
                                                                         Hiraldo • 59


                                      References

Decuir, J., & Dixson, A. (2004). "So when it comes out, they aren't that surprised
     that it is there": Using critical race theory as a tool of analysis of race and
     racism in education. Educational Researcher, 33, 26-31.
Delgado, R. (Ed.). (1995). Critical race theory: The cutting edge. Philadelphia: Temple
     University Press.
Delgado Bernal, D., & Villalpando, O. (2002). An apartheid of knowledge in aca-
     demia: The struggle over the “legitimate” knowledge of faculty of color.
     Equity & Excellence in Education, 35(2), 169-180.
Iverson, S. V. (2007). Camouflaging power and privilege: A critical race analysis
     of university diversity policies. Educational Administration Quarterly, 43(5),
     586-611. DOI: 10.1177/0013161x07307794.
Ladson-Billings, G., & Tate, W. (1995). Toward a critical race theory of education.
     Teachers College Record, 97(1), 47-68.
Ladson-Billings, G. (1998). Just what is critical race theory and what's it doing in
     a nice field like education? International Journal of Qualitative Studies in Educa-
     tion, 11(1), 7-24.
Ladson-Billings, G. (2005). The evolving role of critical race theory in educa-
     tional scholarship. Race Ethnicity and Education, 8(1), 115-119.
McCoy, D. L. (2006). Entering the academy: Exploring the socialization experi-
     ences of African American male faculty. (Doctoral dissertation, Louisi-
     ana State University). Retrieved from http://etd.lsu.edu/docs/available/
     etd04052006-143046/
Parker, L., & Villalpando, O. (2007). A racialized perspective on education leader-
     ship: Critical race theory in educational administration. Education Administra-
     tion Quarterly, 43(5), 519-524 DOI 10.1177/0013161x07307795.
Patton, L., McEwen, M., Rendón, L., & Howard-Hamilton, M. (2007). Critical
     race perspectives on theory in student affairs. New Directions for Student Ser-
     vices, 2007(120), 39-53.
