  How can and should University
    leadership deliver greater
           inclusion?
                                  Dr Jason Arday
                       British Council, Royal Irish Academy
                                      Ireland
Race, Ethnicity, Equality and Inclusion in Higher Education in Ireland and the UK
                             Thursday 30th January 2019




                                                                                    1
A Thought…
• Universities are often regarded as a site for embracing
  multiculturalism, inclusivity and diversity; however, historically
  this has often conflicted with an enduring legacy of racial
  inequality and discrimination…




                                   (Alexander and Arday, 2015).
                                                                   2
The Context…
• The universities minister has criticised UK higher education institutions
  for their failure to recruit and promote Black and minority ethnic
  academics, after figures showed that no black staff were employed
  at the most senior levels…

• Chris Skidmore, Higher Education Minister for England, has suggested
  that the unacceptable number of black academics in the most senior
  leadership roles had fallen from an estimated five in 2017-18 to
  possibly zero in the last academic year…

                                                   (The Guardian, 2020).

                                                                          3
Painting a picture…
• According to figures published by the Higher Education Statistics Agency
  (HESA):

• In 2018-19, there were 535 staff employed as ‘managers, directors or
  senior officials’ across British universities…

• Of the number identified… 475 identified as white, 25 as Asian, Mixed or
  Other ethnicity, and none as Black. The ethnicity of the remaining 35 was
  not known…

                                                            (HESA, 2019).

                                                                          4
Portraying the false narrative…
• The HESA employment statistics are rounded to the nearest five, meaning that one or
  two Black senior staff would be rounded down to nil…


• HESA’s workforce figures showed that 16% of the total UK academic staff identified as
  Black…


• This figure (16%) is misleading because this does not disclose the types of contracts these
  staff hold and what capacity this breaks down within whether professional, senior
  leadership or academic…


• The majority of precarious contracts awarded in higher education have historically been
  provided to Black and ethnic minority staff… (Arday, 2018).

                                                                                            5
The Soundbite… Penetrative Action?!!
In the recent Guardian (2020) article Skidmore stated:

• ‘It is unacceptable that the number of Black academic staff in senior positions has fallen, as this
  does not represent our British society...’

Further he states:

• ‘Universities need to make more progress and I urge all vice-chancellors to address the barriers
  that are holding back black and ethnic minority staff from senior positions…’

He concludes by summarising that:

• ‘A true representation of Britain at the top levels of our universities will support the progression
  of [Black and minority ethnic] staff, as well as improving students’ experience…’

                                                                                                     6
Poultry Numbers…
Figures also demonstrate the paucity of Black Academic Leaders:

• With only 185 out of 11,860 non-academic managerial roles within
  higher education being filled by Black staff, compared with 10,510 who
  identified as White, 410 as Asian and 165 from a mixed background…




                                                         (HESA, 2019).

                                                                       7
The Sad Reality…
• In 2018, the BBC undertook a Freedom of Information request to all 24 universities in
  the Russell Group of highly selective, research-based universities, and 22 responded…

• At these universities, the data showed average salaries of:

• £52,000 for white academics
• £38,000 for black academics
• £37,000 for academics from an Arab background

• This means that Black and Arab academics at the UK's top universities earn an average
  26% less than White colleagues...

• And BAME Female academics fare even worse, with an ethnicity pay gap on top of the
  gender pay gap...
                                                                                     8
The Importance of Diverse Leadership…
• ‘The types of leadership that students and staff within higher
  education are exposed to have a significant bearing on their
  constructions of leadership, particularly when this is not reflective of
  the values embodying social and cultural pluralism and equity…’




   (Adams, 2017; Aguirre and Martinez, 2006; Chun and Evans, 2009;
                                                   Williams, 2013).
                                                                         9
Structural inequality in the Academy…
• While university institutions concern themselves with developing tokenistic
  equality and diversity widening participation interventions…

• The spiral of inequality which pervades continues to disadvantage potential
  BME leaders, who continue to experience a paucity of leadership
  opportunities available to them…




                                  (Miller, 2018; Mirza, 2017; Rollock, 2016).
                                                                           10
Capturing the lived experience…
• It has been very difficult. . . you actually become paranoid because you
  realize that everything you do is unfairly scrutinized and your authority is
  constantly undermined by people around you…

• This becomes so disheartening, particularly in a so-called position of
  leadership… Higher education is racist, and the type of racism it uses is so
  insidious and intelligent . . . The sophistication of racism in the sector now
  makes it harder to quantify to someone. . . in particular White people
  who can sometimes trivialize racism. It sometimes benefits Whites for
  there to continue to be a lack of BME leaders within the sector…

                                 (Female, Black, University Senior Leader).

                                                                              11
Recommendations…
• Strategic agency as well as policy-driven intervention is required if BME academics are
  to gain access and opportunity to senior leadership hierarchies (Shepherd, 2017).

• University diversity agendas and interventions must endeavour to change
  organizational cultures which exclude BME academics from leadership hierarchies.

• Support mechanisms for BME academics wishing to pursue leadership trajectories
  must be focused on developing mentoring interventions situated within formal
  and informal capacities at institutional and departmental levels.

• This type of mentoring must have targeted focus on equipping BME academics
  with the necessary tools to navigate senior leadership.

                                                                                      12
Recommendations…
• For better representation to be achieved, particularly at senior leadership levels,
  affirmative action is required which guarantees a set quota of BME applicants
  proceeding to shortlisting to ensure that applicants are being selected
  from a diverse applicant pool.

• For this process to be effective, universities must ensure that BME academics
  are involved in selection and recruitment processes. It is essential for
  universities to actively disrupt cycles of unconscious bias that reinforce
  cloning and perpetuating unequal representation (Gronn and Lacey,
  2006).

• Targeted programmes must provide BME applicants with access to relevant
  training, which focuses on developing leadership capabilities, extending
  academic networks, and engaging in communities of practice with other
  BME senior leaders within the Academy.
                                                                                  13
Concluding Thought…
• ‘Are you gonna try to make this work… Or spend your days
  down in the dirt… You see things can change…Yes and walls
  can come tumbling down…’




                          (The Style Council, Paul Weller).

                                                          14
