Dr Jason Arday is an Assistant Professor in Sociology at Durham University in the Department of
Sociology. Jason is a Visiting Research Fellow at The Ohio State University in the Office of Diversity and
Inclusion and a Trustee of the Runnymede Trust, the UK’s leading Race Equality Thinktank. He is also
an Elected Steering Committee Member of the Parliamentary Group Comprehensive Future and a
School Governor at Shaftesbury Park Primary School in London.

Jason also sits on the following trade union equality committees; Trade Union Congress (TUC) Race
Relations Committee and the University and College Union (UCU) Black Members’ Standing
Committee. He is a Graduate of the Operation Black Vote (OBV) MP Parliamentary Scheme, a scheme
focused on unearthing the next generation of ethnic minority Parliamentarians.

Jason’s research focuses on Race, Education and Social Justice. He is the Co-Editor of two policy
publications with Professor Claire Alexander (University of Manchester) and Dr Debbie Weekes-
Bernard (Joseph Rowntree Foundation) which have been disseminated within UK Parliament from the
Runnymede Perspectives collection funded by the Arts and Humanities Research Council (AHRC);
Aiming Higher: Race, Inequality and Diversity in the Academy (February, 2015) and The Runnymede
School Report Race: Education and Inequality in Contemporary Britain (September, 2015). He has also
completed a report for University and College Union (UCU) entitled Exploring Black and Minority
Ethnic (BME) Doctoral Students’ perceptions of a career in Academia: Experiences, Perceptions and
Career Progression published in June 2017.

Jason is author of the forthcoming titles: Considering Racialised Contexts in Education: Using
Reflective Practice and Peer-Mentoring to support Black and Ethnic Minority educators (Routledge);
Being Young, Black and Male: Challenging the dominant discourse (Palgrave); Exploring Cool Britannia
and Multi-Ethnic Britain: Uncorking the Champagne Supernova (Routledge). He is the Co-Editor of the
highly acclaimed Dismantling Race in Higher Education: Racism, Whiteness and Decolonising the
Academy (Palgrave) with Professor Heidi Mirza (Goldsmiths, University of London).

Jason is the Lead-editor of the book series on Race and Education (Palgrave) with Professor Michael
Peters (Beijing Normal University), Professor Paul Warmington (University of Warwick), Professor Vikki
Boliver (Durham University), Professor Zeus Leonardo (University of California) and Professor James
Moore III (The Ohio State University).
