Simon & Schuster | Summit Books | 37 Ink

        London Book Fair 2025
          Simon and Schuster, LLC
 1230 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10020
            Michael Nardullo:
 michael.nardullo@simonandschuster.com
       VP Director Subsidiary Rights

           Mabel Taveras Marte:
mabel.marte.taveras@simonandschuster.com
         Subsidiary Rights Manager
NONFICTION
SIMON & SCHUSTER | NONFICTION                                             January 2025 | IS


                                        NEW PRIZE FOR THESE EYES
                                        The Rise of America's Second Civil Rights
                                        Movement

                                        Juan Williams
                                        288 pp.
                                        Territory: World
                                        Agent: Robert B. Barnett




More than a century of civil rights activism reached a mountaintop with the arrival of a
Black man in the Oval Office. But hopes for a unified, post-racial America were deflated
when Barack Obama’s presidency met with furious opposition. A white, right-wing backlash
was brewing, and a volcanic new movement—a second civil rights movement—began to
erupt.

In New Prize for These Eyes, award-winning author Juan Williams shines a light on this
historic, new movement. Who are its heroes? Where is it headed? What fires, furies, and
frustrations distinguish it from its predecessor?

Juan Williams is a prizewinning journalist and historian. He is the author of the bestselling
civil rights history Eyes on the Prize: America’s Civil Rights Years 1954–1965, which
accompanied the PBS series of the same name. He also wrote the landmark biography of
the first African American on the Supreme Court, Thurgood Marshall: American
Revolutionary, as well as The New York Times bestsellers Enough and Muzzled: The Assault
on Honest Debate. He has written for The New York Times, The Wall Street Journal, The New
Yorker, The Atlantic, and Ebony. He is currently senior political analyst for Fox News Channel
and a columnist for The Hill.
   SIMON & SCHUSTER | NONFICTION                                          February 2025 | MH

                                           CALLING IN
                                           How to Start Making Change with Those
                                           You'd Rather Cancel

                                           Loretta J. Ross
                                           288 pp.
                                           Territory: World
                                           Agent: David Kuhn, Aevitas Creative
                                           Management




From a pioneering Black feminist and MacArthur “Genius” Fellow, an urgent and exhilarating
memoir-manifesto-handbook about how to rein in the excesses of cancel culture so we can truly
communicate and solve problems together.

In 1979, Loretta Ross was a single mother who’d had to drop out of Howard University. She was
working at Washington, DC’s Rape Crisis Center when she got a letter from a man in prison saying
he wanted to learn how to not be a rapist anymore. At first, she was furious. As a survivor of
sexual violence, she wanted to write back pouring out her rage. But instead, she made a different
choice, a choice to reject the response her trauma was pushing her towards, a choice that set her
on the path towards developing a philosophy that would come to guide her whole career: rather
than calling people out, try to call even your unlikeliest allies in. Hold them accountable—but do
so with love.

Calling In is at once a handbook, a manifesto, and a memoir—because the power of Loretta Ross’s
message comes from who she is and what she’s lived through. She’s a Black woman who’s
deprogrammed white supremacists, a survivor who’s taught convicted rapists the principles of
feminism. With stories from her five remarkable decades in activism, she vividly illustrates why
calling people in—inviting them into conversation instead of conflict by focusing on your shared
values over a desire for punishment—is the more strategic choice if you want to make real change.
And she shows you how to do so, whether in the workplace, on a college campus, or in your living
room.

Loretta J. Ross is an activist, professor, and public intellectual. In her five decades in the human
rights movement, she’s deprogramed white supremacists, taught convicted rapists the principles
of feminism, and organized the second-largest march on Washington (surpassed only by the 2017
Women’s March). Her many accolades and honors include a 2022 MacArthur Fellowship and a
2024 induction into the National Women’s Hall of Fame.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | NONFICTION                                            February 2025 | SF

                                     HOW TO GET ALONG WITH ANYONE
                                     The Playbook for Predicting and Preventing
                                     Conflict at Work and at Home

                                     John Eliot, Jim Guinn
                                     304 pp.
                                     Territory: World
                                     Agent: James Levin, Levine Greenberg Rostan
                                     Literary Agency

                                     Rights sold
                                     Star Publishing (Chinese Complex)
                                     Unieboek (Dutch)




Through three decades of building and facilitating team chemistry for Fortune 500
companies, professional sports franchises, schools, government agencies, nonprofit
organizations, and families—Drs. Jim Guinn and John Eliot have reduced the time and cost
of conflict resolution. With this on-the-ground experience combined with industry-leading
science and research, Guinn and Eliot discovered people respond to conflict in one of five
ways: avoid, compete, analyze, collaborate, or accommodate.

Filled with fun, engaging examples and actionable techniques, How to Get Along with
Anyone teaches you how to predict and prevent escalated conflict, arming you with practical
tools for flipping the script on sticking points to nurture stronger and more meaningful
relationships.

Dr. John Eliot mentors executives and advises professional sports teams, coaches, and
athletes on how to apply individual and organizational psychology principles for enhancing
health, performance, workplace culture, and bottom line.

Dr. Jim Guinn is the president of the Resolution Resource Group, a training and
development company that works with Fortune 500 companies, professional sports
franchises, large-scale school districts, universities, law firms, and governments on
effectively handling conflict.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | NONFICTION                                              March 2025 | SF

                                         YOU'RE THE BOSS
                                         Become the Manager You Want to Be (and
                                         Others Need)

                                         Sabina Nawaz
                                         272 pp.
                                         Territory: World
                                         Agent: Laura Nola, Aevitas

                                         Rights sold
                                         Ebury Publishing (UK)
                                         China Times (Chinese Complex )
                                         Woongjin Think Big Co. (Korean)
                                         Primero Sueno (Spanish)
                                         Times Business Vietnam JSC (Vietnamese)



Whether you’re in the C-Suite or newly promoted, one thing is clear: you’re succeeding at
your job. But are you reaching your full potential as a manager? Most top performers
suspect they aren’t, and Sabina Nawaz, former Microsoft executive and elite Fortune 500
coach, says they’re usually right. Unfortunately, it’s often hard to recognize the problem or
know how to address it.

In You’re the Boss, Nawaz taps her experience and proprietary data drawn from analyzing
and advising executives at organizations like Amazon, Microsoft, Google, Motorola,
Nordstrom, and the United Nations. Her work reveals a simple truth: as our job expands,
the added pressure to perform will corrupt our actions, and our increased power will blind
us to the impact of those actions. It’s all too easy for even the most well-intentioned
executive to become the boss nobody wants to work for. You’re the Boss offers a new,
evidence-based framework for managing pressure and power with grace and intelligence.

Sabina Nawaz is an elite executive coach who advises C-level executives and teams at
Fortune 500 corporations, government agencies, nonprofits, and academic institutions
around the world. During her fourteen-year tenure at Microsoft, she went from managing
software development teams to leading the company’s executive development and
succession planning efforts for over 11,000 managers and nearly a thousand executives,
advising Bill Gates and Steve Ballmer directly.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | NONFICTION                                            March 2025 | MH

                                         THE MESOPOTAMIAN RIDDLE
                                         An Archaeologist, a Soldier, a Clergyman and
                                         the Race to Decipher the World's Oldest
                                         Writing

                                         Joshua Hammer
                                         400 pp.
                                         Territory: World
                                         Agent: Philippa Brophy, Sterling Lord Literistic




It was one of history’s great vanishing acts.

Around 3,400 BCE—as humans were gathering in complex urban settlements—a scribe in
the mud-walled city-state of Uruk picked up a reed stylus to press tiny symbols into clay. For
three millennia, wedge shape cuneiform script would record the military conquests,
scientific discoveries, and epic literature of the great Mesopotamian kingdoms of Sumer,
Assyria, and Babylon and of Persia’s mighty Achaemenid Empire, along with precious
minutiae about everyday life in the cradle of civilization. And then…the meaning of the
characters was lost.

From the ruins of Persepolis to lawless outposts of the crumbling Ottoman Empire, The
Mesopotamian Riddle whisks you on a wild adventure through the golden age of
archaeology in an epic quest to understand our past.

Joshua Hammer is the New York Times bestselling author of six books, including The Bad-
Ass Librarians of Timbuktu and The Mesopotamian Riddle. His writing has appeared in The
New York Times Magazine, GQ, The Atlantic, The New Yorker, National
Geographic, Smithsonian, and Outside. He lives in Berlin.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | NONFICTION                                              May 2025 | MM


                                        THEATER KID
                                        A Broadway Memoir

                                        Jeffrey Seller
                                        368 pp.
                                        Territory: World
                                        Agent: David Kuhn & Nat Muscato, Aevitas
                                        Creative Management
                                        Manuscript available




Before he was producing the musical hits of our generation, Jeffrey was just a kid coming to
terms with his adoption, trying to understand his sexuality, and determined to escape his
dysfunctional household in a poor neighborhood just outside Detroit. We see him find his
voice through musical theater and move to New York, where he is determined to shed his past
and make a name for himself on Broadway.

But moving to the big city is never easy—especially not at the height of the HIV/AIDS crisis—
and Jeffrey learns to survive and thrive in the colorful and cutthroat world of commercial
theatre. From his early days as an office assistant, to meeting Jonathan Larson and
experiencing the triumph and tragedy of Rent, to working with Lin-Manuel Miranda on In the
Heights and Hamilton, Jeffrey completely pulls back the curtain on the joyous and gut-
wrenching process of making new musicals, finding new audiences, and winning a Tony
Award—all the while finding himself.

Told with Jeffrey’s candid and captivating voice, Theater Kid is a gripping memoir about fighting
through a hardscrabble childhood to make art on one’s own terms, chasing a dream against
many odds, and finding acceptance and community.

Jeffrey is the mastermind behind musical megahits including Rent, Avenue Q, In the Heights,
and Hamilton. His shows have garnered 22 Tony awards among them, including four for Best
Musical, and he is the only producer ever to have made two Pulitzer Prize-winning musicals
(Rent and Hamilton).
SIMON & SCHUSTER | NONFICTION                                                 May 2025 | JK


                                        WHO KNEW

                                        Barry Diller
                                        336 pp.
                                        Territory: World
                                        Agent: Robert Barnett
                                        Manuscript available




Barry Diller, one of America’s most successful businessmen, reveals himself here—his
successes, failures, and struggles—with surprising candor and intimacy in a memoir rich in
Hollywood lore and filled with business acumen.

“I want to work in the mail room at William Morris.” So begins Diller’s show business life. Diller
did not aspire to be an agent, nor was he a glove fit for William Morris, the legendary talent
agency he describes as resembling a “Jewish Vatican.” But he was a good assistant and student
and took it all in.

Before long, Diller was offered a job at ABC. His ascent was meteoric, launching ABC TV’s
Movie of the Week at age twenty-seven, becoming CEO of Paramount Pictures at age thirty-
two, and launching the Fox TV network at age forty-four. Along the way, Diller oversaw the
production of classic films such as Saturday Night Fever, Raiders of the Lost Ark, and Home
Alone (a film he credits with saving Rupert Murdoch’s career) and hit TV shows such as The
Simpsons, Married…with Children, and Cops.

Diller’s media savvy changed the course of American culture. His championing of Alex Haley’s
Roots put long-form miniseries on the map. He was never cowed by the talent—actors,
directors, and producers—and worked with them all. Moving beyond business, Diller recounts
his family life, personal struggles, and regrets, his joyful marriage to Diane von Furstenburg,
and where he has found fulfillment.

Intimate, candid, and moving, Who Knew is a different kind of business memoir, one that holds
nothing back.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | NONFICTION                                      May 2025 | BA and HP


                                       BE THE BOMBSHELL
                                       What Love Island Teaches Us About Dating

                                       Rebecca Jenings
                                       224 pp.
                                       Territory: World English
                                       Agent: Jen Marshall & Jennifer Gates, Aevitas
                                       Creative Management
                                       Manuscript available




Date better, raise your standards, and learn to be true to yourself with these heartfelt lessons
from the Villa.

“Can I pull you for a chat?” “Where’s your head at?” “Maybe we should call it the ‘friendship
island’?” “Do I put all my eggs in one basket?” “Am I a mug?”

These are the questions that plague the Love Islanders competing for love in their sun-soaked
villa—and those of us in the trenches of modern dating. The #1 hit reality TV dating show does
more than offer riveting poolside drama, genuinely touching romances (and bromances), and
hours of contestants in bikinis having the most mundane conversations on the terrace. It
provides an unvarnished portrait of dating, with plenty to say about love, self-worth, and
putting yourself back together after a brutal recoupling.

In this unofficial title, Rebecca Jennings takes the most iconic and unforgettable moments from
Love Island UK and USA to remind us dating should be fun—not just tolerable. A witty love
letter to Love Island superfans, hopeless romantics, and serial swipers, Be the Bombshell will
teach you to demand what you want unapologetically and to tell the difference between
what’s worth the compromise and what’s settling for less than you deserve.

Are you ready? A hot new bombshell has entered the Villa!

Rebecca Jennings is a senior correspondent at Vox. Her work has explored everything from the
joy of reality television to the rise of TikTok and why it feels like suddenly everyone’s an
influencer now.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | NONFICTION                                               June 2025 | MM


                                        ACTRESS OF A CERTAIN AGE
                                        My Twenty Year Trail to Overnight Success

                                        Jeff Hiller
                                        272 pp.
                                        Territory: World English
                                        Agent: Robert Guinsler, Sterling Lord Literistic
                                        Manuscript available




A humorous collection of autobiographical essays from comedian and actor Jeff Hiller,
who shares his journey from growing up “profoundly gay” in 1980s Texas to his
experiences as an inept social worker and how he clawed, scraped, and brawled to
Hollywood’s lower middle-tier.

While struggling to find success as an actor and pay the bills, something accidentally
happened to Jeff Hiller: he aged. And while it’s one thing to get older and rest on the laurels
of success from the blood, sweat, and tears of your youth, it’s quite another to be old and
have no laurels. At forty, stuck in a temp job making spreadsheets, the dream of becoming a
star seemed out of reach. But after twenty-five years of guest roles on TV and performing
improv in a grocery store basement, he finally struck gold with a breakout role on HBO’s
Somebody Somewhere, playing Joel—the kind of best friend everyone wishes they had.

In his book, Jeff dives into the grit and grind of climbing the Hollywood ladder. With a mix of
awkward charm and heartfelt honesty, Jeff shares his journey: growing up very Lutheran in
Texas, navigating bullying as a gay kid, working as a social worker for unhoused youth and
HIV prevention, and the endless ups and downs of being a struggling actor. For every one of
us who have a dream that we’re chasing—and chasing, and chasing—his is a funny, moving,
and utterly relatable story.

Jeff Hiller is an actor, writer and comedian who has appeared on TV shows such as
Somebody Somewhere, American Horror Story: NYC, Crazy Ex-Girlfriend, 30Rock, and Law
and Order: CI, among numerous others. His film roles include Greta, Morning Glory, Ghost
Town, and Set it Up, and he has performed on Broadway, off-Broadway, in Shakespeare in
the Park, Disney musicals, and regional theater
SIMON & SCHUSTER | NONFICTION                                                June 2025 | SM


                                        OASIS TALKING SHITE
                                        An Unauthorized, Unofficial, and
                                        Unaffiliated of Provocations,
                                        Pontifications and Profundities

                                        David Beal and Parker Fishel
                                        208 pp.
                                        Territory: World
                                        Manuscript available

                                        Rights sold:
                                        Nihon Bungei (Japanese)

                                        “Books are for losers. I never need to live others'
                                        stories, mine is enough.” -- Liam Gallagher

                                        “People who write books are fucking idiots." -- Noel
                                        Gallagher

A hilarious unofficial tribute to the most opinionated and entertainingly cantankerous
band in rock and roll history.

Hello and listen up. In 1994, with the shock of the lightning that was Oasis’s force-of-nature
debut album, the British band’s cigarettes-and-alcohol-fueled founding brothers Liam and
Noel Gallagher went supernova all around the world. Most artists would have responded to
this fame by opting to cast no shadow, saying less in public, or at least being more cautious
when they did, reluctant to add to the weight of the world on their shoulders. Not Liam and
Noel, who did a strange thing. As if born on a different cloud, they refused to be quiet ones
and acquiesce to the typical masterplan for celebrity.

For the next thirty years, they never stopped opening their big mouths and shouting out
loud their opinions on everything underneath the sky. Oasis Talking Shite celebrates these
songbirds’ refreshing candor, constructing a magic pie of memorable quotes and
photographs into a wall of wonder. Here they go let it out on nearly every topic imaginable,
including religion, politics, technology, sports, aging, America, aliens, the Big Bang Theory,
open-toed shoes, Christmas, SpongeBob SquarePants, other bands, and of course their all-
time favorite subject: each other.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | NONFICTION                                                 June 2025 | YI

                                        SAY HELLO TO THE BAD GUYS
                                        How Professional Wrestling's New World
                                        Order Changed America

                                        Marc Raimondi
                                        304 pp.
                                        Territory: World
                                        Agent: Kirsten Neuhaus, Ultra Literary
                                        Manuscript available




In 1996, professional wrestling was one of the most watched sports on cable television, with
more than 5 million people tuning in every week. And in the late 1990s, pro-wrestling was
the hottest thing in American pop culture, with companies making millions in action figures,
video games, and simple black t-shirts emblazoned with three little letters: NWO.

The NWO, or New World Order, became a business like no other, and was responsible for
the explosive ratings and rabid fanbase. It started with an ingenious storyline starring Scott
Hall, Kevin Nash, and the titular Hollywood Hogan—Hulk Hogan gone bad. Together, they
formed a new era of characters to root for: The Bad Guys.

This narrative history explores professional wrestling’s most popular faction and how their
existence influenced American culture like never before.

Marc Raimondi is currently an NFL reporter for ESPN. He is a longtime former combat sports
reporting, specializing in mixed martial arts (MMA) and professional wrestling. He
previously served as the deputy managing editor for Vox Media’s MMAFighting.com and
covered multiple sports for Fox Sports and the New York Post. With a focus on MMA, boxing
and pro wrestling, Marc covered major events, provided behind-the-scenes insights, and
reported on the latest news in the combat sports world. He is currently ESPN’s beat reporter
for the Atlanta Falcons.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | NONFICTION                                                 June 2025 | HP

                                        THE MEANING OF JUNGKOOK
                                        The Triumph of BTS and the Making of a
                                        Global Pop Superstar

                                        Monica Kim
                                        240 pp.
                                        Territory: World
                                        Agent: Clare Mao, Sanford J. Greenburger
                                        Associates
                                        Manuscript available

                                        Rights sold
                                        Headline (UK)
                                        Kadokawa (Japanese)
                                        Editora BestSeller (Portuguese/Brazil)
                                        Eksmo(Russian)

Jungkook is one of the world’s biggest stars, period. He has achieved what no other K-pop
star has in the history of the genre. His first album Golden sold 2 million copies on the first
day of its release, and his social media reach is unparalleled as he continues to be the #1
most viewed solo artist on TikTok. How did a young boy from South Korea make music
history?

The Meaning of Jungkook is an unofficial kaleidoscopic examination of the forces that made
Jungkook into the triumph he is today. The book does more than chronicle his humble
beginnings in Busan and meteoric rise to fame. A lively narrative, the book places Jungkook
in a larger cultural and historical context and sheds light on the inner workings of the K-pop
industry, globalization, internet culture, and more. This is an elevated tribute to the singer,
for both his fans and others interested in the genre. Monica Kim has delivered a tour-de-
force with vivid detail that makes sense of the world of a music icon who has captured the
devotion of millions of fans worldwide.

Monica spent five years at American Vogue as the Senior Fashion News Editor. Currently
based between New York and Seoul, she became Yaeji’s stylist in 2018 and works with
brands such as Kozaburo, Rokh, Rare Market, We11done, Laura Lombardi, Penultimate, and
others. The Meaning of Jungkook is her first book.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | NONFICTION                                                 July 2025 | ES


                                        WE ARE EATING THE EARTH
                                        The Race to Fix Our Food System and Save
                                        Our Climate

                                        Michael Grunwald
                                        384 pp.
                                        Territory: World English
                                        Agent: Wylie Agency
                                        Manuscript available




From the author of New York Times bestseller The New New Deal, a groundbreaking piece
of reportage from the trenches of the next climate war: the fight to fix our food system.

We are eating the earth, an ingenious phrase coined by Michael Grunwald, and the greatest
challenge facing our species will be to slow our relentless expansion of farmland into nature.
Even if we quit fossil fuels, we’ll keep hurtling towards climate chaos if we don’t solve our
food and land problems.

In this rollicking, shocking narrative, Grunwald shows how the world, after decades of
ignoring the climate problem at the center of our plates, has pivoted to making it worse,
embracing solutions that sound sustainable but could make it even harder to grow more
food with less land. But he also tells the stories of the dynamic scientists and entrepreneurs
pursuing real solutions, from a jungle-tough miracle crop called pongamia to genetically-
edited cattle embryos, from Impossible Whoppers to a non-polluting pesticide that uses the
technology behind the COVID vaccines to constipate beetles to death. It’s an often
infuriating saga of lobbyists, politicians, and even the scientific establishment making
terrible choices for humanity, but it’s also a hopeful account of the people figuring out what
needs to be done—and trying to do it.

Michael Grunwald, a Time senior correspondent, has won the George Polk Award for
national reporting, the Worth Bingham Award for investigative reporting, and many other
prizes. The Washington Post called The Swamp, “a brilliant work of research and reportage.”
He lives in Florida.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | NONFICTION                                                July 2025 | MH


                                         MAILMAN
                                         My Wild Ride Delivering the Mail in
                                         Appalachia and Finally Finding Home

                                         Stephen Starring Grant
                                         304 pp.
                                         Territory: World
                                         Agent: David Granger, Aevitas Creative
                                         Management
                                         Manuscript available




Steve Grant was laid off in March of 2020. He was fifty and had cancer, so he needed health
insurance, fast. Which is how he found himself a rural letter carrier in Appalachia, back in his
old hometown.

Suddenly, he was the guy with the goods, delivering dog food and respirators and lube and
heirloom tomato seeds and Lord of the Rings replica swords. He transported chicken feed to
grandmothers living alone in the mountains and forded a creek with a refrigerator on his
back. As the pandemic worsened, he became a lifeline for lonely people – a fleeting
moment of human contact and an assurance that our government still cared.

A brash and loving portrait of an all-American institution, Mailman offers a deeply felt
portrait of both rural America and the dedicated (and eccentric) letter carriers who keep our
lives running smoothly day to day. Steve Grant has written an irreverent, heartfelt, and
often hilarious tribute to the simple heroism of daily service, the dignity and struggle of
blue-collar work, the challenge and pleasure of coming home again after twenty-five years
away, and the delight of going the extra mile for your neighbors, every day.

After twenty years as a consumer psychologist, Stephen Starring Grant became a rural route
mailman. A graduate of the Iowa Writer’s Workshop, he lives in Blacksburg, Virginia.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | NONFICTION                                              August 2025 | ES


                                        KICKING THE HORNET'S NEST
                                        Thirteen U.S. Presidents in the Middle East

                                        Daniel Zoughbie
                                        384 pp.
                                        Territory: World
                                        Agent: Zoe Walde, RCW
                                        Manuscript available




The compelling, groundbreaking investigation of how the choices of twelve US presidents,
from Truman to Trump, have fueled turbulence and turmoil in the Middle East. And the
one president who chose a better way.

Today, the Middle East stands as a volatile landscape, more tumultuous than at any time
since the fall of the Ottoman Empire. Zoughbie paints a vivid picture of how nearly every
major nation-state in the Middle East and North Africa has grappled with existential crises in
the recent years, paving the way for terrorist groups to threaten national sovereignty and
for local conflicts to destabilize world order.

Drawing on a vast array of primary sources and interviews with world leaders, the narrative
explores pressing issues like nuclear proliferation, genocide, and nationalist conflicts fueled
by sectarian fervor that have triggered global refugee waves. Kicking the Hornet’s Nest is an
eye-opening study of US presidential decision-making and foreign policy. With compassion
and insight, Zoughbie reveals the essential information necessary for anyone seeking to
understand eight decades of US foreign policy and its profound impact on billions of lives
worldwide.

Daniel Zoughbie is a complex systems scientist, a historian, and an expert on presidential
decision-making. He is Associate Project Scientist at the Institute for International Studies
(IIS) at UC Berkeley, a faculty affiliate of the UCSF/UCB Center for Global Health Diplomacy,
Delivery, and Economics and a faculty affiliate at the New England Complex Systems
Institute in Cambridge.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | NONFICTION                                              August 2025 | SM


                                         IF YOU DON'T LIKE THIS, I WILL DIE

                                         Lee Tilghman
                                         288 pp.
                                         Territory: World
                                         Agent: Lauren Hall, Folio Literary
                                         Management
                                         Manuscript available




A powerful and illuminating memoir that exposes the stark and rarely-seen reality of
influencing as a career.

Lee Tilghman—also known as @LeeFromAmerica—was one of the first wellness influencers.
To her nearly 400,000 followers, she posted about skin care routines, sleep hacks, smoothie
bowls, travel tips, and other rituals of #SelfCare. Her sponsorships with such brands as
Madewell and Subaru netted an income of over $300,000 a year. On the grid, her life
seemed perfect.

But behind her carefully curated posts, Tilghman was in crisis, suffocating from the
unrelenting demand of keeping up her online facade. The more she shared, the more her
followers craved. Her romantic relationships suffered from the pressure to “hard launch.”
Her job’s focus on food led her to develop orthorexia: an unhealthy obsession with eating
“perfectly.” After a stay in a mental health facility to address her disordered eating and
psychological decline, Tilghman quit influencing as her primary career and set out to
discover who she really was.

If You Don’t Like This I Will Die is a bold critique of the influencer economy while also a
relatable story for anyone who has struggled with the unreasonableness of online
expectations.

Lee Tilghman began blogging when she was eighteen, amassing a large following for her
blogs For the Love of Peanut Butter and Lee From America.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | NONFICTION                                           August 2025 | MM


                                        BREAKING INTO NEW HOLLYWOOD
                                        A Career Guide to a Changing Industry

                                        The Los Angeles Times
                                        368 pp.
                                        Territory: World
                                        Agent: Gail Ross, Ross Yoon Literary Agency
                                        Manuscript available




For the millions seeking to pursue their Hollywood dreams, this is the definitive guide to
breaking into the entertainment industry that explores and demystifies dozens of careers
from acting to post-production, and also takes into account changes brought by the rise of
streaming and AI.

Everyone loves a captivating Hollywood rags-to-riches story. Take Leonardo DiCaprio, the son
of a secretary and a comic-book seller in East Hollywood, who saw acting as a way out of
poverty. But that’s not how it usually happens for the tens of thousands of people who work in
the entertainment industry. For many just starting out, and even those already in the business,
the road can feel mysterious and overwhelming.

From actors and directors to behind-the-scenes heroes like managers, grips, and sound
designers, Breaking into the New Hollywood is here to uncover the many opportunities for
newcomers hustling in what the Los Angeles Times calls the “company town” and gives an up-
to-date roadmap for aspiring stars wanting to make a living in front of the camera, but it’s also
for those passionate about being part of the collaborative, creative community like no other.

Ada Tseng is a writer and editor who led the Hollywood careers series at the Los Angeles
Times. She cohosts the Asian American pop culture history podcast Saturday School with Brian
Hu.

Jon Healey is deputy editor on the Los Angeles Times breaking-news team.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | NONFICTION                                            August 2025 | JM


                                        THE ORIGIN OF LANGUAGE
                                        How We Learned to Speak and Why

                                        Madeleine Beekman
                                        320 pp.
                                        Territory: World
                                        Agent: Abigail Koons, Park & Fine Literary and
                                        Media
                                        Manuscript available

                                        Rights sold
                                        S&S UK (UK)
                                        Bertrand Editora (Portuguese/Portugal)




"A tour de force. At its core it seeks to explain the origin of language. Reading Madeleine
Beekman’s book, you will never look at babies—and their utterances—the same way ever
again." - Neil Shubin, evolutionary biologist and author of Your Inner Fish

In a radical new story about the birth of our species, The Origin of Language argues that it
was not hunting, fighting, or tool-making that forced early humans to speak, but the
inescapable need to care for our children.

Faced with highly dependent infants requiring years of nurturing and protection, early
human communities needed to cooperate and coordinate, and it was this unprecedented
need for communication that triggered the creation of human language—and changed
everything. Infused with cutting-edge science, sharp humor, and insights into the history of
biology and its luminaries, Beekman weaves a narrative that’s both enlightening and
entertaining. Challenging the traditional theories of male luminaries like Chomksy, Pinker,
and Harari, she invites us into the intricate world of molecular biology and its ancient
secrets.

Madeleine Beekman is Professor of Evolutionary Biology and Behavioral Ecology Emerita at
the University of Sydney, Australia, Editor-in-Chief of Insectes Sociaux, and board member of
The Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | NONFICTION                                                August 2025 | JL


                                         JEWS VS. ROME
                                         Two Centuries of Rebellion Against the
                                         World's Mightiest Empire

                                         Barry Strauss
                                         384 pp.
                                         Territory: World
                                         Agent: Cathy Hemming, Cathy D. Hemming
                                         Literary Agency
                                         Manuscript available




A new history of two centuries of Jewish revolts against the Roman Empire, drawing on
recent archeological discoveries and new scholarship by leading historian Barry Strauss.

Jews vs. Rome is a gripping account of one of the most momentous eras in human history:
the two hundred years of ancient Israel’s battles against Rome that reshaped Judaism and
gave rise to Christianity. Barry Strauss vividly captures the drama of this era, highlighting the
courageous yet tragic uprisings, the geopolitical clash between the empires of Rome and
Persia, and the internal conflicts among Jews.

Between 63 BCE and 136 CE, the Jewish people launched several revolts driven by deep-
seated religious beliefs and resentment towards Roman rule. Jews vs. Rome recounts the
three major uprisings: the Great Revolt of 66–70 CE, the Diaspora Revolt, and the Bar
Kokhba Revolt. Today, echoes of those battles resonate as the Jewish nation faces new
challenges and conflicts.

Barry Strauss is the Corliss Page Dean Visiting Fellow at the Hoover Institution, professor
emeritus of history and classics at Cornell University and a leading expert on ancient
military history. He has written or edited several books, including The Battle of Salamis, The
Trojan War, Masters of Command, Ten Caesars, and The War That Made the Roman Empire.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | NONFICTION                                             August 2025 | IS


                                       TEACHER BELIEVED IN ME
                                       The Science and Heart of Making a
                                       Difference in Students' Positive Well-Being

                                       David K. Hatch and Muriel Summers
                                       320 pp.
                                       Territory: World
                                       Agent: Shannon Marven, Dupree Miller &
                                       Associates
                                       Manuscript available

From the bestselling team behind classics like The Leader in Me and The 7 Habits of Highly
Effective Teens, a supremely practical and inspiring guide to making a profound difference
in your students' lives and reigniting your passion for teaching.

In this inspirational guide, renowned educators Dr. David K. Hatch and Muriel Summers
reveal seven leadership skill sets that enable teachers to profoundly impact students'
positive well-being and academic success. Drawing upon extensive research and their
decades of experience transforming schools across the globe, the authors provide practical
strategies you can use to connect with your students, help them develop crucial social-
emotional skills, and empower them to reach their full potential.

Packed with moving stories and simple, actionable, evidence-based practices, Teacher
Believed in Me demonstrates how forging authentic connections, nurturing social-emotional
wellness, and meeting core psychological needs can reignite students' engagement and
unlock their innate greatness.

Dr. David K. Hatch earned a bachelor’s in psychology from California State University, Long
Beach, and a doctorate in social-organizational psychology from Brigham Young University.
His work in schools began at a public school for students with special learning needs. He
then taught for the University of Maryland’s European Division in Germany, prior to working
in corporate education with Dr. Stephen R. Covey

Muriel Summers, from the minute she stepped into the classroom, has always viewed
teaching as a calling. As a principal, she twice guided her school, A.B. Combs Elementary in
Raleigh, North Carolina, to being named the top magnet school of America. The school also
became the original leadership school featured in FranklinCovey’s Leader in Me. The vision
and strategies she and her remarkable staff developed are now being replicated in over
7,000 schools and more than fifty countries.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | NONFICTION                                         September 2025 | IS


                                        THE JOY OF SOLITUDE
                                        How to Reconnect with Yourself in an
                                        Overconnected World

                                        Robert Coplan
                                        304 pp.
                                        Territory: World English
                                        Agent: Jennifer Weis, The Weis Agency LLC
                                        Manuscript available.




An engaging, practical guide through the promises and paradoxes of solitude, offering
science-backed advice for getting the most out of your alone time and deepening your
relationship with yourself and others.

Solitude is part of the human experience. But just like other relationships, your relationship
with solitude can be satisfying, intimate, and enhance your well-being, or it can leave you
wanting, stuck in a cycle of sadness, anxiety, or anger. Regardless of whether you're starved
for “me time” or struggling with loneliness, most of us have never thought carefully about
how to get the most out of the time we spend by ourselves. As a result, we’re missing out
on what could be a deeply enriching aspect of our lives. But how can we unlock the positive
power of solitude?

Robert Coplan draws from diverse fields including psychology, neuroscience, literature, and
sociology to guide readers through solitude’s many dimensions and its profound effects on
mental health and well-being. The Joy of Solitude is a vital resource for those who wish to
understand the complexities of solitude and its potential to enhance mental health,
creativity, and self-discovery.

Robert J. Coplan, PhD, is Professor in the Department of Psychology at Carleton University
and Director of the Pickering Centre for Research in Human Development. His research
focuses on the development and implications of shyness and social withdrawal, from early
childhood to emerging adulthood, and across cultures.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | NONFICTION                                        September 2025 | SF


                                        BORN TO BE WIRED
                                        Lessons from a Lifetime Transforming
                                        Television, Wiring America for the Internet,
                                        and Growing Formula One, Discovery, Sirius
                                        XM, and the Atlanta Braves

                                        John Malone
                                        320 pp.
                                        Territory: World
                                        Agent: Robert B. Barnett, Williams & Conolly
                                        Manuscript available.




A legendary media pioneer tells his own incredible story—how he helped reinvent cable
TV, launch high-speed internet, and shape the modern media landscape.

John Malone remains a stranger to most people, though millions of us have been touched
by the technologies and content he made possible. In Born to Be Wired, this “Cable
Cowboy” shares stories of the people behind the most transformative business deals in
media, entertainment, and technology. He recounts the remarkable tale of how America
was wired, and how a strand of copper evolved from a rural TV-antenna service into a
broadband backbone for phone, internet, and streaming services, paving the way for tech
giants like Amazon, Facebook, and Google. Malone gives an insider account of launching
cable’s first TV networks, including Discovery, QVC, TBS, and Black Entertainment Television,
and reveals his strategic thinking behind the largest media mergers of our time, such as
Warner Bros. Discovery, and the global concert firm Live Nation Entertainment
(Ticketmaster).

John Malone is chairman of Liberty Media Corp., Liberty Broadband Corp., and Liberty
Global. He was chairman and chief executive officer of TCI, the largest cable operator in the
US, which merged with AT&T Corp. in 1999. He became the CEO of TCI in 1973 at twenty-
nine years old, a position he held until selling the company. He graduated from Yale
University with a bachelor of science and then received his master’s degree and PhD from
Johns Hopkins University.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | NONFICTION                                            September 2025 | IS


                                          THE LEADER IN ME (Revised ed.)

                                          Stephen R. Covey
                                          272 pp.
                                          Territory: World
                                          Agent: Dupree/Miller & Associates
                                          Material Imminent




From the multimillion-copy bestselling author of The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People,
Dr. Stephen R. Covey illustrates how his principles of leadership can be applied to children
of all ages—updated and revised for modern students.

In today’s world, we are inundated with information about who to be, what to do, and how
to live. But what if there was a way to learn not just what to think about, but how to think?
A program that taught young people how to manage priorities, focus on goals, and be a
positive influence in their schools?

The Leader in Me is that program. In this bestseller, Stephen R. Covey took the 7 Habits that
have already changed the lives of millions of readers and showed that even young children
can use them as they develop. This book is full of examples of how the students blossom
under the program—from the classroom that decided to form a support group for one of
their classmates who had behavioral problems to the fourth grader who overcame his fear
of public speaking and took his class to see him compete in a national storytelling
competition.

Perfect for individuals and corporations alike, The Leader in Me shows how easy it is to
incorporate these skills into daily life so kids of all ages can be more effective, goal-oriented,
and successful.

Recognized as one of Time magazine’s twenty-five most influential Americans, Stephen R.
Covey (1932–2012) was an internationally respected leadership authority, family expert,
teacher, organizational consultant, and author. His books have sold more than twenty-five
million copies in thirty-eight languages, and The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People was
named the #1 Most Influential Business Book of the Twentieth Century
SIMON & SCHUSTER | NONFICTION                                        September 2025 | ED


                                        DIRTBAG BILLIONAIRE
                                        How Yvon Chouinard Built Patagonia, Made
                                        a Fortune, and Gave It All Away

                                        David Gelles
                                        320 pp.
                                        Territory: World English
                                        Agent: Amanda Urban, ICM Partners
                                        Material Imminent




New York Times reporter and author of the New York Times bestseller The Man Who
Broke Capitalism, David Gelles’s Dirtbag Billionaire is about how Patagonia became a
global leader in doing well by doing good and how other companies are adopting its
principles.

Yvon Chouinard has forged one of the most extraordinary careers in modern business
history. He founded Patagonia in 1973, which quickly became a wildly popular producer of
jackets, hats, and fleece vests, with a cultlike following among hardcore alpinists and Wall
Street traders alike, and with sales of more than $1 billion a year.

But while Patagonia is by many measures a conventional corporation, it is unlike any other
company on the planet. Guided by Chouinard’s anti-authoritarian streak and his unwavering
commitment to preserving the natural environment, Patagonia has distinguished itself as a
singular beacon for socially responsible business, the rare company that can legitimately
claim to be doing its damnedest to make the world a better place, while also making a
profit. From its early efforts to take exemplary care of its employees, to its extensive work
trying to clean up its supply chain, to its controversial environmental activism, Patagonia has
set itself apart from its peers in corporate America with one unorthodox decision after
another, proving to the world that there is another way to do capitalism.

Dirtbag Billionaire tells the story of Chouinard and Patagonia as they turned the business
world on its head.

David Gelles is an award-winning reporter for the New York Times. He currently writes for
the climate desk and previously wrote for the business section and was the “Corner Office”
columnist. His latest book, The Man Who Broke Capitalism, was a New York Times bestseller.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | NONFICTION                                          September 2025 | JL


                                         HISTORY MATTERS

                                         David McCullough
                                         208 pp.
                                         Territory: World English
                                         Agent: Anne Sibbald, Janklow & Nesbit
                                         Material Imminent




In this posthumous collection of thought-provoking essays—many never published
before—Pulitzer Prize–winning historian and bestselling author David McCullough affirms
the value of history, how we can be guided by its lessons, and the enduring legacy of
American ideals.

History Matters brings together selected essays by beloved historian David McCullough,
some published here for the first time, written at different points over the course of his long
career but all focused on the subject of his lifelong passion: the importance of history in
understanding our present and future. Edited by McCullough’s daughter, Dorie McCullough
Lawson, and his longtime researcher, Michael Hill, History Matters is a tribute to a master
historian and offers fresh insights into McCullough’s enduring interests and writing life. The
book also features a foreword by Jon Meacham.

Rich with McCullough’s signature grace, curiosity, and narrative gifts, these essays offer vital
lessons in viewing history through the eyes of its participants, a perspective that
McCullough believed was crucial to understanding the present as well as the past.

David McCullough (1933–2022) twice received the Pulitzer Prize, for Truman and John
Adams, and twice received the National Book Award, for The Path Between the
Seas and Mornings on Horseback. His other acclaimed books include The Johnstown
Flood, The Great Bridge, Brave Companions, 1776, The Greater Journey, The American
Spirit, The Wright Brothers, and The Pioneers.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | NONFICTION                                       September 2025 | PP


                                       IT DOESN'T HAVE TO HURT
                                       Your Smart Guide to a Pain-Free Life

                                       Sanjay Gupta
                                       400 pp.
                                       Territory: World
                                       Agent: Robert B. Barnett, Esq.
                                       Manuscript available

                                       Rights sold
                                       Headline (UK)




Transform your everyday life by reducing and eliminating chronic pain with the latest
science-backed pain relief techniques and expert practical advice from America’s
bestselling doctor and neurosurgeon Sanjay Gupta.

Dr. Sanjay Gupta makes the empowering argument that there are effective options for pain
relief that you can start practicing today to greatly reduce your chances of suffering pain
tomorrow.

The significance of reducing and even eliminating pain cannot be overstated. Gupta shows
how pain carries an enormous amount of physical, social, and emotional baggage, which is,
in part, why it has been so hard to treat, and too often ignored. Yet it turns out we have
tremendous agency in choosing how we’ll respond to pain. The brain “creates” pain, but it
also has the capacity to reduce or even eliminate it. Gupta runs the gamut of conventional
and complementary approaches, including the technique known as Mobilization Exercise
Analgesia Treatment, foam rolling, acupuncture, trigger point injections, and vital
“prehabilitation” before any operation. He covers psychedelics, supplements, and CBD. And
he highlights insights from some of the nation’s leading pain scientists and specialists, plus
stories of challenge and triumph over pain by those with lived experience.

Dr. Sanjay Gupta is CNN’s Emmy Award–winning chief medical correspondent and the host
of the acclaimed podcast Chasing Life (formerly Coronavirus: Fact vs. Fiction), America’s go-
to resource for expert advice on how to stay healthy and safe. He is the #1 New York
Times bestselling author of Chasing Life, Cheating Death, Monday Mornings, and Keep
Sharp.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | NONFICTION                                             October 2025 | SM


                                           SCENE

                                           Abel Ferrara
                                           192 pp.
                                           Territory: World exc. Italian
                                           Agent:
                                           Manuscript available




A kaleidoscopic memoir by acclaimed filmmaker Abel Ferrara, director of the cult classic
films Bad Lieutenant, King of New York, and Dangerous Game, offering an unflinching look
at his life, career, and the gritty world of independent cinema.

Throughout his five-decade career, film director Abel Ferrara—now in his seventies—has
been one of cinema’s most provocative and critically revered figures. Since beginning as an
independent filmmaker in Manhattan in the early 1970s—before “indie films” were a
genre—and refining his craft as a director for the TV show Miami Vice, he has directed more
than thirty feature films, most notably the cult classics Bad Lieutenant, King of New York,
and Dangerous Game.

His work, often controversial for its depictions of sex, violence, and drugs, has been praised
for its sincerity and depth, with critics noting that his films take spirituality and morality
more seriously than most films do. In Scene, Ferrara opens up about the inspiration for his
creativity detailing his dramatic life journey, from his rough upbringing in the 1950s Bronx to
reaching the pinnacle of his career while struggling with addiction. This memoir is not just a
recounting of his life but a manifesto on what it means to be a true artist—one who refuses
to compromise and continues to create boundary-pushing work.

Abel Ferrara is a critically acclaimed film director. Some of his cult classic works include Bad
Lieutenant, King of New York, and Dangerous Game. He lives in Rome.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | NONFICTION                                               October 2025 | YI


                                                 TENDERHEADED

                                                 Michaela Angela Davis
                                                 320 pp.
                                                 Territory: World English
                                                 Agent: Mollie Glick, CAA
                                                 Manuscript available



Discover the compelling memoir that explores race, cultural representation, Black media’s
legacy, privilege, and identity from VIBE’s founding fashion editor and CNN correspondent
Michael Angela Davis.

As VIBE’s founding fashion editor and a CNN correspondent, Michaela Angela Davis has
been at the forefront of cultural shifts, working alongside iconic figures like Diana Ross,
Prince, and Beyoncé. Her memoir is a celebration of Black media’s vibrant history and a
critical examination of its challenges and erasure in mainstream narratives.

In Tenderheaded, Davis journeys back through her career as both a celebration and an
interrogation of Black media, exploring the difficult truth of how historically Black media
titles and brands have had such mighty, culture-shifting starts, then disappeared or limped
along in mainstream obscurity. Her story is one of self-discovery and liberation, as she
navigates the complexities of identity politics, sexism, and racism within the media industry.
Her career has been a tapestry of glamorous adventures from the bustling streets of 1980s
New York City to the exotic markets of Morocco, all while styling some of the most
influential figures in music and culture. Yet, beneath the surface of this dazzling world lies a
poignant narrative of struggle and resilience.

Michaela Angela Davis is a writer, creative director, producer, and image activist focusing on
the intersections of gender, race, fashion, culture, beauty, and identity. Davis collaborated
with Mariah Carey on The Meaning of Mariah Carey, which was an instant #1 New York
Times bestseller, and also another collaboration for a children’s book titled The Christmas
Princess. She was the fashion editor and fashion, beauty, and culture editor
at Essence magazine, founding fashion director at VIBE magazine, and fashion and editor in
chief of Honey magazine.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | NONFICTION                                             October 2025 | YI


                                        EPISODES
                                        My Mental Health Journey

                                        Gucci Mane
                                        288 pp.
                                        Territory: World
                                        Agent: Robert Guinsler




Gucci Mane, one of hip-hop’s most iconic figures and a trailblazer in Atlanta’s rap culture,
reveals his struggles with mental health and drug addiction that will provide fans and
readers with insights into his career and life.

In Episodes, Gucci revisits his life and shares what was really going on for the first time. The
mental anguish, the pitfalls, the triggers no one speaks about. Each episode is Gucci
experiencing something—something you may remember from the news or even heard in his
music—and giving you the background of where he was mentally. He reveals how his
fascination with money got the worst of him, why he committed certain crimes, the story
behind his ice cream cone tattoo, and how his wife felt watching him overdose. Along the
way, he interviews medical professionals and mental health experts to provide insight into
mental health awareness.

Episodes is Gucci’s way of reaching beyond the “each one, teach one” approach of
discussing mental illness behind closed doors, opting instead to cultivate a discourse
amongst a culture that, while steadily improving how it regards mental health, still
stigmatizes public discussions around the topic. This compelling memoir sheds light on both
his inner struggles and his triumphs, offering an unflinching account of a man who defied
the odds to leave a lasting legacy on music, culture, and conversations around mental
health.

Gucci Mane is a critically acclaimed, platinum-selling recording artist and New York
Times bestselling author of The Autobiography of Gucci Mane. He has released fifteen
studio albums and over a hundred overall projects.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | NONFICTION                                       November 2025 | SM

                                       OZZY & ME
                                       Life Lessons, Wild Stories, and Unexpected
                                       Epiphanies from Forty Years of Friendship
                                       with the Prince of Darkness

                                       Stephen Rea
                                       288 pp.
                                       Territory: World
                                       Agent: Sam Chidley, Karpfinger Agency




Stephen Rea was born in Northern Ireland in 1969, the same year “The Troubles” began. His
grandmother was nearly killed when gunmen opened fire on the wrong house, leaving
young Stephen to pick at the bullet holes in the walls. He found refuge from this turmoil in
heavy metal—especially the music of Ozzy Osbourne.

In late 1984, when Stephen was fifteen, he read about a huge festival in Rio de Janeiro that
January called “Rock In Rio” whose bill included AC/DC, Queen, and Osbourne. As a lark, he
asked his parents if they would take him, and was stunned when they said yes. He was even
more shocked when his mother, looking for information about how to get tickets, began a
correspondence with Osbourne’s secretary, who scored the family VIP passes and
introduced them to Osbourne in Brazil. Thus began a friendship with Ozzy, his wife Sharon
and the rest of the Osbourne family that has continued for decades.

Ozzy gifted Stephen a pair of fancy leather notebooks and told him to keep a record of their
adventures and conversations. The result is Ozzy & Me: a beautiful behind-the-scenes
memoir that proves the life-affirming, soul-nourishing power of music—and disproves the
notion that you should never meet your heroes.

Stephen Rea is a former United Kingdom newspaper journalist and the author of the
memoir Finn McCool’s Football Club. Originally from Northern Ireland, he lives and teaches
writing in New Orleans.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | NONFICTION                                          November 2025 | PP


                                         THE GOD TEST
                                         Artificial Intelligence and Our Coming Cosmic
                                         Reckoning

                                         Robert Wright
                                         352 pp.
                                         Territory: World
                                         Agent: Raphael Sagalyn, ICM Partners
                                         Manuscript imminent




From bestselling author and Pulitzer Prize finalist Robert Wright comes a sweeping new
view of artificial intelligence that argues this revolution will challenge us spiritually and
could restore a missing ingredient in modern life—our sense of purpose.

The God Test is the first book that sees AI not just as a technological tool with good and bad
applications, but as an evolutionary force that will alter the trajectory of humanity itself.
Written by one of our foremost public intellectuals and informed by his decades of
chronicling the digital age, the book boldly asserts that the current wave of AI progress is
just the beginning.

Wright provocatively suggests that to truly understand the significance of the AI revolution,
we need to expand our perspective beyond the last century or even the whole history of
technology and look back billions of years, across the entire history of life on Earth. All
along, he says, evolution has been pushing life toward this technological threshold, which
now confronts our species with a climactic challenge: Can we muster the political, moral,
and spiritual resources needed to guide this technology wisely?

Robert Wright is the New York Times bestselling author of The Evolution of God (a finalist for
the Pulitzer Prize), Nonzero, The Moral Animal, Three Scientists and their Gods (a finalist for
the National Book Critics Circle Award), and Why Buddhism Is True. He is the co-founder and
editor-in-chief of the widely respected Bloggingheads.tv and MeaningofLife.tv.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | NONFICTION                                      November 2025 | SM


                                      BOOK THEY THROW AT YOU
                                      A Sarcastic Lawyer's Guide* to the Unholy
                                      Chaos of Our Legal System (*God, No, Not
                                      Actual Legal Advice)

                                      Reb Masel
                                      320 pp.
                                      Territory: World English
                                      Agent: Toni Rose Goulden, Viral Nation
                                      Material Imminent




Reb Masel was in need of comic relief from the stress of her job as an attorney when she
started posting videos online of funny court transcripts she had come across at work. Her
audience online exploded, but she isn’t just a TikTok comic—she also reveals the law’s
intricacies, nuances and absurdities, and she clarifies what rights you do and don’t have in
various situations. Her millions of followers have come to rely on her frank, relatable, and
often humorous approach to current events and the convoluted legal system.

The Book They Throw At You spans the full spectrum, featuring fervent, magnanimous,
retrospective, and insightful commentaries on consequential cases, human nature, injustice,
and how our laws actually affect us. Reb brings a fun, fresh perspective to the field,
highlighting the hilarious, outlandish, and sometimes downright insane legal stories that
only a lawyer can explain.

With dark humor you only get from going to law school, Reb takes the whole system to
court, revealing how devastating, absurd, and good-intentioned the law can be. And yet, she
reminds us, the courtroom is a comedy show. It’s okay, you can laugh.

Reb Masel is a practicing attorney and host of The Rebuttal Podcast. She lives in Los
Angeles.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | NONFICTION                                       November 2025 | SM


                                       CASE FOR AMERICAN POWER

                                       Shadi Hamid
                                       256 pp.
                                       Territory: World
                                       Agent: Bridget Matzie, Aevitas
                                       Material Imminent




A provocative case for why a better world is only possible with American power by
Washington Post columnist Shadi Hamid.

From acclaimed author Shadi Hamid comes an urgent and deeply personal argument for
why American dominance, despite its many flaws, remains the world’s best hope. Hamid
traces his journey from opposing America’s role in the world to reluctantly embracing it—
while grappling with how recent events, from Russia’s invasion of Ukraine to Israel’s
devastating war in Gaza, have challenged his convictions.

Drawing on his unique perspective as both an American and a Muslim who came of age in
the shadow of the September 11 attacks, Hamid contends with the contradictions of
American power: how a nation founded on moral purpose so often fails to live up to its
ideals. Hamid confronts head-on America’s failures, from the war in Iraq to support for
authoritarian regimes across the Middle East. Yet, he argues that in a world where power is
a fact and someone must wield it, the alternative to American leadership isn’t a moral
superpower—it’s the brutal authoritarianism of countries like China and Russia.

Bracing and timely, The Case for American Power is an ambitious work on what may be the
most fundamental question facing America today: How should we think about the power
we have—while we still have it?

Shadi Hamid is a columnist at The Washington Post and a research professor of Islamic
studies at Fuller Seminary. Hamid is the author of several books, including The Problem of
Democracy and Islamic Exceptionalism, which was short-listed for the 2017 Lionel Gelber
Prize for best book on foreign affairs.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | NONFICTION                                        November 2025 | PP


                                        LUIGI
                                        The Making and The Meaning

                                        John H. Richardson
                                        192 pp.
                                        Territory: World
                                        Agent: David Granger, Aevitas
                                        Material Imminent




The first book to explain why the world was primed for the Luigi Mangione moment,
showing the history that led him to be embraced as an avenger with an affection not seen
since Jesse James or Robin Hood.

The explosion of glee and sympathy for Luigi surprised everyone, but it was everywhere.
Hours after the shooting of the United Healthcare executive, his company put out a
message out on Facebook saying their “hearts go out to Brian’s family and all who were
close to him.” People replied with laughing emojis and comments like this one: “No one
here is the judge of who deserves to live or die. That’s the job of the AI algorithm the
insurance company designed to maximize profits on your health.”

When he was arrested, TikTok exploded with more love for Luigi: “They could’ve been more
gentle with him, he has back problems,” said one commentator. Others attempted to come
to his rescue. “He is innocent, he was with me the whole time.”

So where is all this coming from? Richardson has tracked the building blocks of this
widespread alienation for three decades, finding it across not only the environmental
movement but among those who reject capitalism itself, including the rules that govern
everything from insurance to healthcare. He has followed the men and women who have
gone to extremes to express that alienation, and studied the inspirations they found in
other outlaws, most especially Ted Kaczynski (Luigi had posted a review of Kaczynski’s
manifesto on Goodreads). The result is a book that will put Luigi in context and even
illuminate how his appeal is likely to play out in the future.

John H. Richardson is a writer-at-large for Esquire and the author of My Father the Spy, In
the Little World, and The Vipers’ Club.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | NONFICTION                                              January 2026 | SF


                                         HOW IDEAS HAPPEN
                                         And How You Can Find Them

                                         George E. Newman
                                         320 pp.
                                         Territory: World
                                         Agent: Alison MacKeen & Alexis Burgess/Park
                                         & Fine Literary and Media
                                         Manuscript available

As much as there has been written about creativity, there is still a big unknown about
what happens when we actually come up with a good idea. This book demystifies that
process and in so doing, offers a bold new perspective about where ideas come from, and
how we can better arrive at them

We’re used to thinking about creativity as a private lightbulb moment: a switch flips, a spark
ignites, an epiphany happens. An idea which didn’t exist before, suddenly does. But new
findings in cognitive science and adjacent fields, show that creativity is in fact, a remarkably
orderly process—one that has more in common with the rigorous, systematic steps that
define the scientific method. The process that gives rise to transformative ideas in any
realm—the arts, sciences, industry—looks a lot more like discovery than it does creation. In
other words, arriving at a great idea is more like plugging into an external power grid than
having a private lightbulb moment.

By making these implicit rules explicit, Digging for Fire turns conventional wisdom about
creativity inside-out, shifting the spotlight from our latent inner “genius” to a much more
attainable knack for navigating the conceptual landscapes all around us. Like the intrepid
archeologist who depends on both meticulous excavation and a well-honed sense for where
to look, we’ll come to see that arriving at great ideas is not a natural gift bestowed on us at
birth.

Instead, the creative process is an adventure of ideas. But like most great adventures, it
requires a method and a map.

George E. Newman is an Associate Professor at the Rotman School of Management at the
University of Toronto. He has authored over 60 peer-reviewed scientific articles in leading
journals, and his work is regularly featured in popular media outlets including the New York
Times, The Economist, the BBC, Scientific American, Forbes, the Wall Street Journal, and the
Washington Post.
  SIMON & SCHUSTER | NONFICTION                                            January 2026 | SF

                                          SUPERTEAMS
                                          The Science of High-Performing Teams

                                          Ron Friedman
                                          288 pp.
                                          Territory: World
                                          Agent: Lucinda Halpern, Lucinda Literary, LLC
                                          Proposal available

                                          Rights sold
                                          Fine Press (Chinese Complex)
                                          Cheers Publishing Company (Chinese Simplified)
                                          Primero Sueno (Spanish)


The ultimate playbook for building high-performing teams, packed with practical, eye-opening
insights from the most comprehensive study of elite groups ever conducted.

What do the best teams do differently? To find out, award-winning social psychologist Ron
Friedman launched a landmark study surveying thousands of teams, pinpointing the habits that
separate the best from the rest.

In a world of endless meetings and 24/7 work, what truly sets high-performing groups apart is
their relentless commitment to three critical factors: focus, teamwork, and growth

Blending eye-opening discoveries with unforgettable stories, Superteams takes you inside the
writers’ room of Succession and Bridgerton, the recording studio of ABBA and Fleetwood Mac,
the kitchens of fine dining restaurants, the laboratories of Nobel Prize–winning scientists, and
the locker rooms of NBA and NFL teams.

Throughout the journey, you’ll discover a wealth of counterintuitive findings, including:
-Why top performers worry less about disappointing their boss than their peers
-Why where you work doesn’t matter nearly as much as how you work
-The only office amenity that reliably improves team performance (spoiler: it’s not coffee)

Ron Friedman, PhD, is an award-winning psychologist and the founder of ignite80, a learning
and development company that teaches leaders science-based strategies for building high-
performing teams. He is the author of The Best Place to Work, an Inc. Magazine Best Business
Book of the Year, and Decoding Greatness.
  SIMON & SCHUSTER | NONFICTION                                           January 2026 | SR

                                          BLACK DAHLIA
                                          Murder, Monsters, and Madness in
                                          Midcentury America

                                          William J. Mann
                                          528 pp.
                                          Territory: World
                                          Agent: Malaga Baldi, Malaga Baldi Literary
                                          Agency
                                          Manuscript available


From the New York Times Bestselling author of Tinseltown and Bogart comes the first
definitive account of the Black Dahlia murder–the most famous unsolved true crime case in
American history–which humanizes the victim and situates the notorious cold case within an
anxious country grappling with new ideas, demographics, and technologies.

The brutal murder of Elizabeth Short in 1947 has been in the public consciousness for nearly
eighty years, yet no serious study of the crime has ever been published.

Short has been mischaracterized as a wayward sex worker or vagabond, and, like the seductive
femme fatales of film noir, responsible for and perhaps deserving of her fate. Mann reveals her
as a young woman with curiosity and drive, who leveraged what little agency postwar society
gave her to explore the world, defying increasingly draconian postwar gender expectations to
settle down, marry, and have children. It’s time to take a new look at the woman behind the
Black Dahlia epithet.

Using a 21st-century lens, bestselling crime writer and Hollywood biographer William J. Mann
connects Short’s story to the anxious era after World War II, when the nation was grappling with
new ideas, new demographics, new technologies, and old fears dressed up as new ones. Only by
situating the Black Dahlia case within this changing world can we understand the tragedy of this
young woman, whose life and death offer surprising mirrors on today.

William J. Mann is a New York Times-bestselling author of The Contender: The Story of Marlon
Brando, for which he was granted access to Brando’s private estate archive, as well as Kate: The
Woman Who Was Hepburn (named a Notable Book of the Year by the Times), and Hello
Gorgeous: Becoming Barbra Streisand.
  SIMON & SCHUSTER | NONFICTION                                              January 2026 | IS


                                           WAR AT THE EDGE OF THE WORLD
                                           The Struggle for Power in a Melting Arctic

                                           Kenneth R. Rosen
                                           256 pp.
                                           Territory: World
                                           Agent: Keith Urbahn, Javelin Group
                                           Manuscript available



A gripping blend of travelogue and frontline reporting, War at the Edge of the World reveals
how climate change, military ambition, and economic opportunity are transforming the Arctic
into the epicenter of a new cold war, where a struggle for dominance between the planet's
great powers heralds the next global conflict.

Russian spies. Nuclear submarines. Undersea communications severed in the dark of night.
Exploded gas pipelines. The fastest-warming place on earth, where apartment buildings,
hospitals and homes crumble daily or are wiped away by rising seas, the Arctic stands at the
crossroads of geopolitical ambition and environmental catastrophe. As climate change melts
ancient ice and opens access to shipping lanes and natural resources, the world's military
powers are rushing to stake their claims in this increasingly strategic region. We're already in a
new cold war, and it is on the brink of turning hot.

In War at the Edge of the World, reporter Kenneth R. Rosen takes readers on an extraordinary
journey across the changing face of the far north. Through intimate portraits of scientists,
soldiers, and indigenous communities in 21 countries on 4 continents, he witnesses firsthand
how rising temperatures and growing tensions are reshaping life above the Arctic Circle. He
embeds with Navy SEALs training for arctic warfare, joins Coast Guard patrols monitoring
Russian incursions, and visits remote research stations where international cooperation is giving
way to espionage and suspicion.

Kenneth R. Rosen is a journalist and the author of Troubled and Bulletproof Vest. He has
reported from more than two dozen countries, with his work appearing in The New Yorker, New
York Times, The Atlantic, and WIRED. He is the recipient of a Kurt Schork Award, a Bayeux-
Calvados Award for War Correspondents, and is a two-time finalist for the Livingston Award for
his work in Syria and Iraq.
  SIMON & SCHUSTER | NONFICTION                                              April 2026 | MH

                                          IN TREES
                                          Murder, Monsters, and Madness in
                                          Midcentury America

                                          Robert Moor
                                          320 pp.
                                          Territory: World in the English language
                                          Agent: Bonnie Nadell, Hill Nadell Literary
                                          Agency
                                          Manuscript Imminent


From the New York Times bestselling author of On Trails, a deep and encompassing
exploration of how trails explain the world--from insect pheromone trails to the Appalachian
Trail, from neural pathways to the Internet.

“In order to grasp the wisdom of a tree, one must first shed certain preconceptions. A tree is not
just a thing made up of bark and leaves and sap and wood. A tree is a shape, a pattern, a mode
of being. A tree is not even really a noun. It is more like a verb—branching, pruning, gnarling.
The result is something inventive, exacting, and long-lasting. Something wise.”

So begins In Trees — an erudite, witty, and relentlessly curious adventure through science,
history, philosophy, and the glorious green chaos of the natural world. Searching for people who
have dedicated their lives to arboreal pursuits, Moor falls in with an eccentric clan of tree-
climbers helping Sir David Attenborough film his latest documentary in the grove where the
modern environmental movement was born. He travels to Papua to learn from a tribe of people
who live in treehouses high above the jungle floor and to East Africa to study our arboreal
cousins, the great apes, in the wild. He traces his family tree to painful places and our
evolutionary tree to wondrous ones.

A bold and inspiring thinker with an essayist’s delight in lyrical language and unexpected
connections, Moor probes a thousand questions in these pages, from how we face the gnarled
parts of our own history to how we peer into the wilderness of one another’s minds. How might
we find in trees a strategy for persisting, learning to live with our wounds and imperfections and
retain our wildness as we age?

Robert Moor is the New York Times bestselling author of On Trails and the creator of the
podcast Joe Exotic: Tiger King. His writing has appeared in The New Yorker, The New York Times,
The Atlantic, GQ, Harper’s and Outside, among other publications.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | NONFICTION                                               May 2026 | SF


                                       FINE ART OF LOSING CONTROL
                                       How to Master a Rebellious Brain and Put It
                                       to Work for You

                                       Heather Berlin, Phd, MPH
                                       288 pp.
                                       Territory: World
                                       Agent: James Levin, Levine Breenberg Literary
                                       Agency
                                       Proposal available

                                       Rights sold
                                       Penguin Random House (UK)
                                       Citic Press Corporation (Chinese Simplified)
                                       Matar Publishing House (Hebrew)
                                       Ushio Shuppansha (Japanese)
                                       Wisdom House (Korean)
                                       Alpina Publishers (Russian)
                                       Ediciones Urano S. A. U. (Spanish)

A tour of the science of impulse control that shows readers what happens when the
“impulse” and “control” areas of the brain go out of balance, leading to many of our self-
destructive behaviors.

Not all impulses are destructive of course. The impulse to stand up and scream along with
everyone else in the stadium when your team scores a winning goal, and the impulse to
stand up and scream at your boss during a staff meeting are divided only by a few brain
circuits that assess context and social consequences. The book uses modern neuroscience
and psychology to show how the brain processes impulses. Dr. Berlin shows how the brain
works, why impulses sometimes lead us astray, and what you can do to take control of your
own thoughts and behavior, and make your brain work for you.

Heather Berlin is a neuroscientist and professor of psychiatry at Mount Sinai and hosts
Startalk with Neil DeGrasse Tyson and the PBS series Science Goes to the Movies.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | NONFICTION                                              May 2026 | SM


                                       TESTIMONY OF DESIRE

                                       Mark Donen
                                       288 pp.
                                       Territory: World
                                       Agent: Elizabeth Sheinkman, Peters Fraser &
                                       Dunlop Group
                                       Material TK




A memoir by Mark Donen, son of the filmmaker Stanley Donen, who directed such
Hollywood classics as Singing in the Rain, Charade and Funny Face, that focuses on how
Mark and Stanley’s fourth wife, actress Yvette Mimieux, fell in love and carried on an
affair while Yvette and Stanley were still married.

The affair started when Mark was 17 and Yvette was 37, though it was the culmination of a
connection that had been developing since they first met seven years earlier, when Mark
was just ten years old. Yvette and Stanley eventually divorced. Yvette and Stanley eventually
divorced. Stanley never confronted Mark about it. But upon Stanley’s death, his will read:
“To my son Mark, I leave nothing. He knows why.”

In this powerfully candid work, Mark Donen takes a subject that is incredibly taboo and
humanizes it, in turn challenging the reader’s inhibitions and morals.

Mark Donen was born in Westminster, UK. He holds a PhD in French from Boston University.
He has worked in the movies, photography and magazines, and has taught at Boston
University, Williams College, and several Parisian grandes écoles and universities. He speaks
Spanish, French and English. He lives in Paris.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | NONFICTION                                                  May 2026 | SF


                                        AMERICAN MURDER MYSTERY

                                        Lisa Sweetingham
                                        352 pp.
                                        Territory: World
                                        Agent: David Halpern, David Halpern Literary
                                        Management
                                        Proposal available




 Investigative journalist and author of CHEMICAL COWBOYS Lisa Sweetingham's reveals the
 true story behind the controversial homicide investigation of a small-town Midwest singer
 and bartender named Egypt Covington, a cold case that reveals a hidden crisis in American
 detective work and points to much-needed solutions in our justice system.

 This will be a deeply-researched, character-driven narrative along the lines of Slenderman
 and Ghettoside — books that dissect a single, fascinating case to shine a light on a larger,
 national problem

 Criminal investigations in America are a tragic failure because most detectives lack proper
 investigative training, experience, and collaboration skills. In fact, it may surprise readers to
 learn that the U.S. is among the worst nations in the industrialized world when it comes to
 solving homicides.

 Germany clears about 90% of its murders; the UK hovers around 70%. And while the U.S.
 cleared about 90% of its homicides in the 1960s, today just 50% of all murders are cleared.
 Even with improved forensics, surveillance, and DNA technology, cops throughout the US
 are hitting their lowest clearance rates in more than 60 years.

 Readers of Lisa’s book will walk away with a deeper understanding of the inner workings of
 criminal investigations and a model for how everyday people, with no legal knowledge, can
 bend the system toward justice.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | NONFICTION                                              July 2026 | JM


                                      THE SLIME MOLD'S GUIDE TO WORLD
                                      DOMINATION
                                      A Natural History

                                      Jessica Frazer
                                      352 pp.
                                      Territory: World
                                      Agent: Giles Anderson
                                      Proposal available




Slime molds have baffled biologists for centuries. Almost as soon as the Ph.D.s finally solved
the mystery that had preoccupied them for the first 300 years—“What the hell are these
things?”—a new one arose: “They’re … intelligent? How can a single giant cell possibly be
intelligent?” Slime molds can tell time, solve mazes, drive actual robots, hunt and kill small
animals — or each other. When it comes time to make little slime molds, they produce
exquisite art installations and, ahem, reproductive equipment. But are they really… smart?

 Veteran science writer and former Scientific American blogger Jennifer Frazer has taken an
unusual, highly informative and entertaining approach to natural history in writing her
surprising romp through the world of the most charismatic mega-protists. This is bizarre but
fascinating biology woven into a compelling investigation of slime mold’s alleged cognitive
abilities and geopolitical ambitions.

Jennifer Frazer’s writing on scientific mysteries has won the AAAS Science Journalism Award
and the Distinguished Science Journalism in the Atmospheric and Related Sciences from the
American Meteorological Society. For nine years, she wrote the Scientific American blog
“The Artful Amoeba.” Her feature stories have appeared in Scientific American, Nature, High
Country News, and Grist. She has twice been a guest on NPR’s RadioLab and one of her
opinion pieces was recently quoted extensively on The Late Show with Stephen Colbert.
This is her first book.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | NONFICTION                                                              July 2026 | SF


                                              THE VAGINA REVOLUTION

                                              Ara Katz
                                              320 pp.
                                              Territory: World
                                              Agent: Sarah Passick, Park & Fine
                                              Proposal available




 From the co-founder and co-CEO of microbiome science company Seed Health, which reaches more than
 84M followers across its platforms, a groundbreaking book on women’s health in the bestselling vein of
 Our Bodies, Ourselves, and the recent #1 NYT bestseller, The New Menopause.


 You’ve probably heard of the gut microbiome, a massive and complex community of microorganisms that live
 inside your digestive tract and affect your overall health. Widespread awareness of the gut microbiome has
 transformed the lives of millions of people, who now eat, exercise, supplement, and go about their lives in more
 strategic ways to support their gut microbiomes to prevent and even treat illness and disease.

 The next frontier is the vaginal microbiome—the ecology of 10 billion microbes that reside in your vagina—
 which comprises an underexplored but critical component of women’s health. More than 90% of vaginal
 health issues are related to the vaginal microbiome.

 THE VAGINA REVOLUTION is poised to be a transformative force, arming you with knowledge and tools to
 optimize your vaginal microbiome and take charge of your health.

 The groundbreaking campaigns that Ara leads at Seed have won numerous awards including Inc.’s Best in
 Business; Fast Company's World Changing Ideas in 2019, 2020, 2021, 2022, and 2023; and TIME's Best
 Inventions 2018, and Ara herself has earned spots on CNBC’s “Changemakers: Women Transforming
 Business” (2024) and Inc.’s “100 Female Founders: The Top Women Entrepreneurs of the Year” (2022), among
 other accolades. Seed’s advisers include the biggest and most influential names in health such as renowned
 scientists Dr. Jacques Ravel, Dr. Sara Szal Gottfried, Dr. Mark Hyman, and more. Celebrities such as Sophia
 Bush, Jessica Biel, Elaine Welteroth, Gwyneth Paltrow, and Karlie Kloss are supporters and spokespeople for
 the brand.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | NONFICTION                                            August 2026 | IS


                                       SWEARING A BLUE STREAK
                                       The Long Dirty History of Cursing in America
                                       and the Battle to Suppress It

                                       Steven H. Jaffe
                                       288 pp.
                                       Territory: World
                                       Agent: Deidre Mullane, Mullane Literary
                                       Sample material avaialable.




 Historian and curator Steven Jaffe tells an alternative American history shaped by the foul
 language we use, from curses hurled in battle at Bunker Hill and Gettysburg, to the shock of
 Hemingway, Ginsberg, and Harlem jazz, to "Tipper stickers," the "7 Dirty Words You Can
 Never Say" and the no-limits speech of the Trump era.

 Steven Jaffe is a historian, writer, and curator who has previously focused on local New York
 history including New York at War: Four Centuries of Combat, Fear, and Intrigue in Gotham.
 He has overseen exhibitions at the South Street Seaport Museum, New-York Historical
 Society, and Museum of the City of New York. A featured commentator in Spike Lee’s HBO
 Max documentary NYC Epicenters 9/11—2021 ½, as well as on BBC, Nat Geo, and American
 Heroes Channel, and has been interviewed about his books on by many New York media
 outlets and presented at the New York Public Library, the Gotham Center for New York City
 History, the Museum of the City of New York, Fraunces Tavern Museum, and the Lower East
 Side Tenement Museum.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | NONFICTION                                       September 2026 | TC



                                       SHELTER ON THE LAKE

                                       Rebecca Erbelding, PhD
                                       320 pp.
                                       Territory: World
                                       Agent: Anna Sproul-Latimer, Neon Literary LLC
                                       Proposal available.




The story of 982 Holocaust refugees who were hand-selected for America’s only World
War 2 refugee camp.

In the summer of 1944, 982 men, women, and children—mostly Jewish, ragged from years
of running, some still wearing the striped uniform of the concentration camps—arrived in
Oswego, NY. For the next 500 days, these refugees--"guests" of Roosevelt's newly created
War Refugee Board, struggle to assimilate to their new home behind a barbed wire fence, to
grapple with the trauma rapidly catching up with them, and to contend with their unknown
legal status. They deal with the drama of everyday life: menial work, romance, conflict with
each other and their neighbors. Fourteen people lose their lives and twenty-three people
are born, triggering a bureaucratic panic in Washington as Justice Department lawyers argue
about whether the 14th amendment applied.

Ultimately, there’s a happy ending for the refugees. Though they are told they’d have to
return to Europe where their families were murdered, they advocate for themselves to
become American citizens, and the government grants their request. They are helped by
Eleanor Roosevelt, W.E.B. Du Bois, and Albert Einstein, who all lobby for their cause. They
find unlikely allies in the local townspeople—blue-collar immigrants themselves who come
to love their new neighbors. The refugees and their descendants go on to do great things:
contribute artwork to the Met, become a co-owner of Zabar’s, and help to develop the Cat
scan and MRI, among other accomplishments.

Dr. Erbelding is the most accomplished historian in America on the subject of U.S. responses
to the Holocaust. Her first book, RESCUE BOARD (Doubleday, 2018), won the National
Jewish Book Award.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | NONFICTION                                               January 2027| SF


                                         THE SEVEN VIRTUES OF GREAT INVESTORS

                                         Jason Zweig
                                         224 pp.
                                         Territory: World
                                         Agent: Rafe Sagalyn
                                         Proposal available

                                         Rights sold
                                         Harriman House (UK)
                                         China Machine Press (Chinese Simplified)
                                         Book21 (Korean)
                                         Editora Bestseller (Portuguese/Brazil)
                                         Porto Editora (Portuguese)
                                         Primero Sueno (Spanish)

Expanding on his popular "Intelligent Investor" column in the Wall Street Journal, author
and journalist Jason Zweig develops a concept first proposed by Benjamin Graham in
1949: Success in the financial markets goes not to the smartest, but to the wisest.

Instead of trying to control the markets, great investors focus on controlling themselves -- by
systematically cultivating a set of personality traits that can only be called virtues. They are:
Curiosity, Skepticism, Independence, Discipline, Humility, Patience and Courage. The world’s
greatest investors share these positive qualities; without them, such financial titans as
Benjamin Graham, Warren Buffett, Charlie Munger, Peter Lynch, Jack Bogle, John
Templeton, John Rogers, Bill Miller, and Jim Simons would be forgotten mediocrities.

This book build on what Zweig has already written about the seven virtues of great
investors, adding new layers of insight from financial history, from behavioral finance and
neuroeconomics, and from Wall Street Journal readers themselves, who have shared dozens
of vivid anecdotes about how they’ve sought to apply these virtues in their own investing
lives.

Jason Zweig is an award-winning financial journalist whose writing has appeared in The Wall
Street Journal, Money magazine, Time, CNN, and much more. He is the author of
several finance books, including Your Money and Your Brain and The Devil’s Financial
Dictionary.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | NONFICTION                                         February 2027| MH


                                       SHITTY BOYFRIENDS OF WESTERN
                                       LITERATURE

                                       Reina Hardy
                                       320 pp.
                                       Territory: World exc. UK
                                       Agent: Sarah Levitt, Aevitas Creative
                                       Management
                                       Manuscript available

                                       Rights sold
                                       Ediciones Urano (Spanish)




A comedic and erudite romp through the heartthrobs of the Western canon, mixing
cultural criticism with the author's own romantic misadventures to explore how classic
literature has warped our ideas of love.

Reconsidering love and relationships through an erudite yet personal self-help lens, each
chapter will hinge on a different literary boyfriend— Mr. Darcy, Sherlock Holmes, Cyrano de
Bergerac, etc. —as it explores the stories we inherit and perpetuate against men and
women, as a kind of antidote to The Rules.

As Reina writes, when it comes to romance and partnering up, we are still playing for a
prize.

Reina Hardy’s plays have been seen across the US, and in the UK and Australia. Her first
movie, a romcom set at a Jane Austen convention (working title: Paging Mr. Darcy) will air
on the Hallmark Channel sometime in 2024. She’s also an educator who has taught
playwriting for the past seven years at Interlochen Arts Camp, and the cofounder of The
Viola Project, an educational nonprofit that uses the works of Shakespeare to unite and
empower girls and gender non-conforming youth.
FICTION
SIMON & SCHUSTER | FICTION                                               January 2025 | OTS


                                         THE REALLY DEAD WIVES OF NEW JERSEY

                                         Astrid Dahl
                                         288 pp.
                                         Territory: World
                                         Agent: Sarah Phair, Sanford J. Greenburger
                                         Associates




"Juicy, gossipy, and deliciously vicious, my platonic ideal of a novel. Whether this all-star cast
of wives is throwing shade in their confessionals or literally killing to get more screen time,
one thing is certain, this New Jersey neighborhood has enough secrets to guarantee renewal.
Readers will be clamoring for Season Two of this funny, dark guilty pleasure." —KATY HAYS,
New York Times bestselling author of The Cloisters

A propulsive page-turning thriller following the hit reality TV show Garden State
Goddesses where secrets are uncovered, intense rivalries surface, and a startling murder
propels a producer on a riveting quest for the truth.

On this season of Garden State Goddesses: Getting canceled means getting killed.

When Hope Bennett marries Carmela’s brother, Leo, she becomes not only a Fontana, but a
Garden State Goddess—and not everyone is happy. Secrets will be revealed, decades-long
rivalries will surface, and a sudden murder will lead to a reality reckoning no one is prepared
for—least of all the show’s producer, Eden, who must race to catch a killer and save the
most dramatic season of all time.

Astrid Dahl is an author, fangirl, and law school dropout. She lives in Los Angeles, where she
plans to die.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | FICTION                                               March 2025 | OTS


                                        PARADISE LOGIC

                                        Sophie Kemp
                                        256 pp.
                                        Territory: World
                                        Agent: Jim Rutman, Sterling Lord Literistic




"The funniest book of the year and one of the smartest." —GARY SHTEYNGART "Paradise
Logic is an astonishment, and the odyssey of Reality Kahn reads like the strangest, funniest,
most profound, vibrant, and trippy dream you ever had, except it’s not just a dream, it’s a
work of art, deeply real and dangerously alive." —Sam Lipsyte

A hilarious, surreal, and devastating journey into the mind of Reality Kahn, a young
woman on a quest to be the greatest girlfriend of all time.

It was decreed from the moment she was born. Twenty-three-year-old Reality Kahn would
embark on a quest so great, so bold. She would become the greatest girlfriend of all time.
She would be a zine maker, an aspiring notary, the greatest waterslide commercial actress
on the Eastern Seaboard. She would receive messages from the beyond in the form of
advice from the esteemed and ancient ladies magazine, Girlfriend Weekly.

When she attends a party in Gowanus at a punk venue known as “Paradise,” Reality meets
Ariel, who will become her boyfriend. She bravely works for his everlasting affection and
joins a clinical trial created by Dr. Zweig Altmann to help her become a more perfect
girlfriend. But Reality will also learn that sheer will and determination, and a very open
heart, are not always enough to make true love manifest.

Sophie Kemp is an American novelist. She has taught in the writing program at Columbia
University. Her short fiction and essays can be found in The Paris Review, New York
magazine, Pitchfork, GQ, Granta, Vogue, and the Baffler.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | FICTION                                                 April 2025 | TOC

                                        BIG CHIEF

                                        Jon Hickey
                                        320 pp.
                                        Territory: World
                                        Agent: Michelle Brower, Trellis Literary
                                        Management

                                        Rights sold
                                        S&S UK (British)
                                        Penguin Random House Canada (English)
                                        Editions, Gallmeister (French)
                                        Bompiani (Italian)




There, There meets The Night Watchman in this gripping literary debut about power and
corruption, family, and facing the ghosts of the past.

Mitch Caddo, a young law school graduate and aspiring political fixer, is an outsider in the
homeland of his Anishinaabe ancestors. But alongside his childhood friend, Tribal President
Mack Beck, he runs the government of the Passage Rouge Nation, and with it, the tribe’s
Golden Eagle Casino and Hotel. On the eve of Mack’s reelection, their tenuous grip on
power is threatened by a nationally known activist and politician, Gloria Hawkins, and her
young aide, Layla Beck, none other than Mack’s estranged sister and Mitch’s former love.

But when an accident claims the life of Mitch’s mentor, a power broker in the reservation’s
political scene, the election slides into chaos and pits Mitch against the only family he has.
As relationships strain to their breaking points and a peaceful protest threatens to become
an all-consuming riot, Mitch and Layla must work together to stop the reservation’s descent
into violence.

Jon Hickey earned his MFA at Cornell University and was a Stegner Fellow at Stanford
University. His short fiction has appeared in Massachusetts Review, Gulf Coast Online,
Virginia Quarterly Review, Meridian, and The Madison Review. Jon lives in San Francisco
with his wife and two sons.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | FICTION                                                May 2025 | TOC


                                        PORTALMANIA
                                        Stories

                                        Debbie Urbanski
                                        320 pp.
                                        Territory: World English
                                        Agent: Kate Garrick, Salky Literary
                                        Management

                                        Manuscript available.




If you could go anywhere, where would you go? And what happens to the people you
leave behind?

From the author of After World comes a genre-busting collection of stories that reveal our
lives in a startling new light, perfect for fans of Kelly Link and Carmen Maria Machado

In Portalmania, Debbie Urbanski wields sci-fi, fantasy, horror, and realism to build a dark
mirror that she holds up to the ordinary world. Within the sharply imagined landscape of
this collection, portals appear in linen closets, planetary gateways materialize in boarding
schools, monsters wait in bathroom vents, and transformations of women’s bodies are an
everyday occurrence. Political division causes physical rifts that break apart the Earth’s
crust. A son on another planet sends dispatches home to the mother who failed him, and a
wife turns to the supernatural to escape her abusive marriage. Portals are not only
doorways found in children’s classics, but separations, escapes, dead ends, desertions, and
choices that will change these characters’ lives forever.


Debbie Urbanski is a writer, nature lover, and human whose stories and essays have been
published widely in such places as The Best American Science Fiction and Fantasy, The Best
American Experimental Writing, The Sun, Granta, Orion, and Junior Great Books.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | FICTION                                                  May 2025 | TOC


                                        THE PALACE OF SINNERS AND SAINTS

                                        Farhan Burdah
                                        352 pp.
                                        Territory: World
                                        Agent: Melissa Edwards, Stonesong Press

                                        Manuscript available.




In this action-packed thrill ride perfect for fans of Jack Reacher, a small band of
mercenaries must infiltrate a 12th-century Middle Eastern castle turned black-site prison,
where the life of a hero of democracy hangs in the balance.

Irfan Mirza, a hired gun and man of faith, agrees to take on the protection of Prince
Mahmud bin Habib. Mahmud is being hunted by the despotic Middle Eastern regime of
Aldatan, where his cousin, King Nimir bin Dalil, rules with an iron fist. Mahmud's popularity
and his calls for democracy and free elections have made him a target.

After an elite squad of King Nimir’s soldiers captures Mahmud, and Mirza is forced to launch
a rescue operation. He learns that since King Nimir came to power, there have been a
variety of high-profile disappearances. Rumors of a black site prison where they are all being
held abound...


Ammar Merchant was born in Pakistan. He has spent time in the Middle East, Southeast
Asia, and Eastern Europe. The breadth of his travels is reflected in his work. The Palace of
Sinners and Saints is his debut thriller, a genre of which he’s been a lifelong fan.
 SIMON & SCHUSTER | FICTION                                                    June 2025 | TOC


                                            THE SLIP

                                            Lucas Schaefer
                                            496 pp.
                                            Territory: World
                                            Agent: Christopher Schelling, Selectric Artists

                                            Manuscript available.




"How can a book be uproarious and thought provoking, devil-may-care and philosophical, as
full of life in all its ugliness and beauty and strangeness as Lucas Schaefer’s The Slip?
Complicated and comic, this is a novel about what it means to long to be otherwise, with a
mystery at its heart, as well as love and ruthlessness and the kind of crazy imagination
missing lately from American fiction. —Elizabeth McCracken, bestselling author of The Hero
of This Book

For readers of Jonathan Franzen and Nathan Hill comes a haymaker of an American novel
about a missing teenage boy, cases of fluid and mistaken identity, and the transformative
power of boxing.

Austin, Texas: It’s the summer of 1998, and there’s a new face on the scene at Terry Tucker’s
Boxing Gym. Sixteen-year-old Nathaniel Rothstein has never felt comfortable in his own
skin, but under the tutelage of a swaggering, Haitian-born ex-fighter named David Dalice, he
begins to come into his own. Across the city, Charles Rex, now going simply by "X," has been
undergoing a teenage transformation of his own, trolling the phone sex hotline that his
mother works, seeking an outlet for everything that feels wrong about his body, looking for
intimacy and acceptance in a culture that denies him both. More than a decade later,
Nathaniel’s uncle Bob receives a shocking tip, propelling him to open his own investigation
into his nephew’s disappearance.

Lucas Schaefer lives with his family in Austin. The Slip is his first novel.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | FICTION                                                  June 2025 | OTS


                                        MIDNIGHT AT THE CINEMA PALACE

                                        Christopher Tradowsky
                                        400 pp.
                                        Territory: World English
                                        Agent: Kent Wolf, Neon Literary

                                        Manuscript available.




This tender, exuberant novel about a young man navigating coming of age in ’90s San
Francisco is for readers of Garth Greenwell and André Aciman.

Walter Simmering is searching for love and purpose in a city he doesn’t realize is fading
away—San Francisco in 1993, at the height of the AIDS epidemic and the dawn of the tech
revolution. Out of college, out of the closet, and transplanted from the Midwest, Walter is
irresistibly drawn from his shell when he meets Cary Menuhin and Sasha Stravinsky, a
dynamic couple who live blithely beyond the boundaries of gender and sexuality. Witty and
ultra-stylish, Cary and Sasha seem to have stepped straight out of a sultry film noir,
captivating Walter through a shared obsession with cinema and Hollywood’s golden age. As
the three embark on adventures across the city, filled with joie de vivre, their lively
friendship evolves in unexpected ways. When Walter befriends Lawrence, a filmmaker and
former child actor living with HIV, they pursue a film project of their own, with hilarious and
tragic results.

Midnight at the Cinema Palace is a vibrant and nostalgic exploration of young souls
discovering themselves amidst the backdrop of a disappearing city. Christopher Tradowsky’s
astonishing debut captures the essence of ’90s queer culture and the complex lives of
friends seeking an aesthetically beautiful and fulfilling way of life.
Christopher Tradowsky is a writer, artist, and art historian. He was awarded the 2023 J.
Michael Samuel Prize from the Lambda Literary Foundation. Midnight at the Cinema
Palace is his debut novel.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | FICTION                                                 July 2025 | TOC


                                      FLORIDA PALMS

                                      Joe Pan
                                      480 pp.
                                      Territory: World
                                      Agent: Stephanie Cabot, Susanna Lea
                                      Associates

                                      Rights sold
                                      Ukranian (Family Leisure Club)




The Outsiders meet Sons of Anarchy in this gripping debut about a group of young
men dragged into a drug-running operation. Optioned for HBO by Francesca Orsi
(Succession, White Lotus, The Last of Us, Euphoria) with Josh Stern at Wiip (Mare of
Easttown, The Summer I Turned Pretty) producing.

It’s 2009, the height of the Great Recession. Best friends Eddy and Cueball are fresh out
of high school and wild at heart, but the economy is in the dumps. With jobs scarce along
Florida’s Space Coast, they join a furniture moving company run by Cueball’s father, a
gruff ex-con biker who’s supposedly retired from the fast life. But when a mysterious old
boss arrives in town, the payload is switched out, and the young men are coerced into
shipping a new designer drug up the East Coast. What is advertised as a bastion of
brotherhood and respect quickly spirals into back-alley deals, bloodshed, and an all-out
turf war that will test the bounds of love and friendship.

Soaring, ambitious, and deeply humane, Florida Palms is a gritty coming-of-
age story with a big heart and an unflinching vision of the violence and inequities facing
forgotten communities. In a relentless race against desperate circumstances, the young
friends hope to find the escape velocity needed to get out, before they up face down in
the muck of the unforgiving swamps

Joe Pan is the author of five books of poetry and many published short stories. In 2007,
he founded Brooklyn Arts Press, publisher of over 70 books, which became the smallest
house ever honored with a National Book Award win in Poetry (2016).
SIMON & SCHUSTER | FICTION                                           November 2025 | OTS


                                        THE TORTOISE'S TALE

                                        Kendra Coulter
                                        272 pp.
                                        Territory: World (ex. Canada)
                                        Agent: Chris Bucci, Aevitas Creative
                                        Management
                                        Manuscript available.




"You'd have to be a rock not to be profoundly moved by the voice of this gentle tortoise
and the multi-species community she cares for. This book is powerful, urgent, important,
a new kind of story for a crazy century—and with one of the most evocative and haunting
endings I’ve ever read. Gorgeous, and exactly what we need. I'd follow this tortoise and
this author anywhere." - Deb Olin Unferth, author of Barn 8

A century of American history unfolds through the eyes of a giant tortoise with a
heightened awareness for live music, the location of edible flowers, and the nuances of
human behavior in this spellbinding debut novel.

Snatched from her ancestral lands, a giant tortoise finds herself in an exclusive estate in
southern California where she becomes an astute observer of societal change. Her
journey is one of discovery, as she learns to embrace the music of jazz and the warmth of
human connection.

The tortoise’s story is enriched by her bond with Takeo, the estate’s gardener, who sees
her as a being with thoughts and feelings, not just a creature to be observed. The
tortoise’s mind and heart are further expanded by Lucy, a young girl who names the
tortoise Magic and shares a friendship that transcends species. Together, they witness
the estate’s transformation into a haven for industry titans, politicians, and rock stars,
each leaving their mark on the world and on Magic’s heart.

Kendra Coulter earned a PhD from the University of Toronto and is a Professor at Huron
University College at Western University where she leads the world’s first major in animal
ethics and sustainability leadership. She is the author of Defending Animals: Finding
Hope on the Front Lines of Animal Protection. The Tortoise’s Tale is her first novel.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | NON-FICTION                                    November 2025 | HP


                                     I'M SAD AND HORNY

                                     Haley Lu Richardson
                                     128 pp.
                                     Territory: World
                                     Agent: Joe Veltre and Hayley Nusbaum, The
                                     Gersh Agency
                                     Manuscript available.


 The stunning debut collection of poetry from Haley Lu Richardson, actress— and a
 twenty-something girl just trying to make it out alive.

 I’m Sad and Horny explores the ecstasy of love, heartbreak, and the chaos of being in
 your twenties. Ghosting, breakups, making friendship bracelets, masturbating out of
 sadness, falling in love with yourself—Haley Lu Richardson captures it all. This poetry
 collection showcases the versatility of the White Lotus actress. Heavily designed with
 evocative images on every page, I’m Sad and Horny celebrates the singular and exquisite
 journey of a twenty-something girl loving too hard and finding her way home.

 Haley Lu Richardson is an American actress celebrated for her dynamic roles in both
 independent and mainstream films. She gained recognition in movies such as The Edge of
 Seventeen, Split, and the critically acclaimed indie film Columbus. Richardson has since
 starred in notable projects like Five Feet Apart, HBO’s The White Lotus, and Love at First
 Sight. Beyond acting, she is a skilled dancer and passionate crocheter, running her own
 Etsy shop for handmade designs. I’m Sad and Horny is her debut poetry collection.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | FICTION                                            January 2026 | TOC


                                       IF WE CANNOT GO AT THE SPEED OF LIGHT

                                       Kim Choyeop; translated by Anton Hur

                                       192 pp.
                                       Territory: World excluding Korea, Japan,
                                       China, Taiwan, Thailand, France and Spain
                                       Agent: Lucy Carson, Friedrich Agency LLC
                                       Manuscript available.

                                       Rights sold
                                       Maclehose (UK)
                                       Editora Aleph (Portuguese/Brazil)




Now available in English, this internationally bestselling story collection depicts another
world and has sold over 200,000 copies.

“Why Don't Pilgrims Return?” paints a future where 'perfect' gene selection is possible, and
those who do not belong in the category of perfection are pushed out of bounds. A
grandmother scientist struggles to reunite with her family in a distant universe. “If We
Cannot Move at the Speed of Light” tells the story of hate toward unreasonable boundaries
and longing for a family beyond the vast universe. The author has created stories we want
to read and share together in a way that we can imagine places we can't reach.

Kim Choyeop works include If We Cannot Go at the Speed of Light, The Greenhouse at the
End of the World, The World We Just Left, and The Dispatched. She has won the Writer of
Today Award, the Young Writer Award, the Korean Publishing Culture Award, and China's
Galaxy Prize. Anton Hur was double-longlisted and shortlisted for the 2022 International
Booker Prize and was a finalist for the 2022 National Book Award. He is the author
of Toward Eternity and lives in Seoul, Korea.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | FICTION                                              August 2026 | OTS


                                       TOMORROW'S SHADOWS

                                       Noëlle Michel
                                       320 pp.
                                       Territory: World English
                                       Agent: 2 Seas Literary Agency
                                       Manuscript imminent


 Sea of Tranquility meets Dark Matter in this dizzying speculative thriller following a clan of
 Neanderthals living in isolation on a nature reserve and the scientists who care for them.

 A clan of humans: They hunt and gather, they have lovers and rivals, their own society. They
 pass on the legends of their ancestors and celebrate festival nights. Their world is the forest
 which feeds them, and, aside from the fierce cold and illness, the only thing they have to
 fear is the Beast who prowls the impassable Bounds. They do not know that beyond it an
 entirely different world exists. Our world.

 Set in the near future, the Neanderthal race has been recreated from fragments of DNA and
 reintroduced on a nature reserve where they are observed and studied, ultimately
 becoming the subjects of a hit documentary series. Following a cast of characters across
 time: Blood Moon, the leader of the Neanderthal clan who is mourning the death of her
 partner; Blizzard. Eva and Noah, scientists in modern-day Paris hired to work on a top-secret
 project; Jules, a teenager growing up in a secluded mountain town with a suspiciously
 pronounced brow; Adam, an actor brought to appear on NeanderTales for the first time.
 Until readers will finally come face to face with the man behind the project, but is he Sapien
 or Neanderthal?

 A reeling suspense novel with shocking surprises that also sheds light on our ethical and
 moral considerations in and out of nature, showing the other human we could have been,
 Tomorrow’s Shadows will grip you until the very end.

 Noëlle Michel is a translator and author. An engineer in biological engineering (1999-2002),
 she worked for ten years in wastewater treatment (2002-2013). Passionate about languages
 ??and literature, she became a freelance translator. Initially specializing in technical
 translation, she then developed her skills in literary translation. Noëlle Michel has lived in
 Ghent, Dutch-speaking Belgium, since 2002.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | FICTION                                          September 2026 | OTS


                                         CLOSE RELATIONSHIPS WITH STRANGERS

                                         Krista Diamond
                                         320 pp.
                                         Territory: World English
                                         Agent: Danielle Bukowski, Sterling Lord
                                         Literistic, Inc.
                                         Manuscript available

Close Relationships with Strangers by Krista Diamond follows a Las Vegas wildlife
photographer who moves to Los Angeles to become a paparazzo and in the process loses
his relationships, his morals, and eventually his tether to reality.

Ben is a third-generation Los Vegan itching to leave for LA, a city he thinks is more ‘real’ than
his hometown. He works as a busser in a diner where tourists come to recreate a movie
scene starring Jack Whitlock, “the last real movie star,” and takes photos of wildlife in the
desert on his days off. He meets a man who promises Ben can make a ton of money as a
paparazzo, which he likens to wildlife photography; Ben and his girlfriend Ellory move to LA.
The job is a thrill and a high that he chases to increasingly damaging ends.

A year and a half later Ben is broke, single, and receiving increasingly credible death threats
from a pop star’s stans. He’s desperate for a win. And then photos of Jack Whitlock leak: an
affair, a scandal. Ben becomes obsessed with being the first photographer to break new
photos of Jack. He follows leads through the absurd horrors of celebrity LA, dodging close
encounters with the stans, weaving his way back to Las Vegas and the desert of his
redemption or demise.

Using a non-linear narrative, Close Relationships with Strangers is propulsive and darkly
humorous.

Krista Diamond is a Black Mountain Institute PhD fellow in creative writing at the University
of Nevada Las Vegas. Her writing has been supported by Bread Loaf, Tin House, the Nevada
Arts Council, and has appeared in The New York Times, Cosmopolitan, Slate, Longreads,
Hazlitt, Catapult, Joyland, and elsewhere. The opening of Close Relationships With Strangers
was longlisted for both the First Pages Prize and the Stockholm Writers Festival First Pages
Prize.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | SUMMIT BOOKS                                               March 2025 | JC


                                         THE PARIS EXPRESS
                                         Emma Donoghue

                                         288 pp
                                         Territory: World
                                         Agent: Kathleen Anderson, Anderson Literary
                                         Management
                                         Manuscript available

                                         Rights sold
                                         Grupo Anaya (Spanish)
                                         Porto (Portuguese/Portugal)
                                         Einaudi (Italian)
                                         Azbooka (Russian)



“Donoghue establishes an intricate web of human relationships as the narrative speeds
toward an unexpected yet plausible finale….Readers ought to jump on board.”
—Publishers Weekly, starred review
“A marvel….In [Donoghue’s] hands, the novel’s long-ago setting becomes an exciting place buzzing
with fresh life and technological ideas on the cusp of a new century, even as horror strikes.”
—Booklist, starred review
“Captivating! Emma Donoghue writes in rich, luxuriant detail, yet the story moves at an
exhilarating clip. THE PARIS EXPRESS brings big questions about human interconnectedness
into an edge-of-your-seat historical thriller that I couldn’t put down.”
—Shelby Van Pelt, author of Remarkably Bright Creatures
“Clever, ambitious, and richly researched. A slice of 1890s Paris that makes us see that our
modern problems aren’t so modern after all! The Paris Express is a smartly structured novel
that ratchets up the pace until it's hurtling along as fast as the doomed train itself.”
—Alice Winn, author of In Memoriam

Emma Donoghue, the “soul-stirring” (Oprah Daily) nationally bestselling author of Room,
returns with a sweeping historical novel about an infamous 1895 disaster at the Paris
Montparnasse train station.

Emma Donoghue is the author of sixteen novels, including the award-winning national
bestseller Room, the basis for the acclaimed film of the same name.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | SUMMIT BOOKS                                             August 2025 | JC


                                         DESTROY THIS HOUSE
                                         A Memoir

                                         Amanda Uhle
                                         352 pp.
                                         Territory: World English
                                         Agent: Julie Stevenson, Massie & McQuilkin
                                         LLC
                                         Manuscript available.




“Amanda Uhle’s extraordinary memoir does what so few do, combining absolutely jaw-
dropping material with the writerly skill to make it sing. I wanted to reread it immediately. It
is a stunning debut you will recommend to everyone you know.” - Jennifer
Traig, author of Devil In The Details: Scenes from an Obsessive Girlhood

“An iconic, only-in-America fable of desperate Midwestern dreamers.” — Dave Eggers,
author of A Hologram for the King

“Destined to become a classic in the daughter-memoir genre, Destroy This House offers a
tour of one couple's decaying, overdrawn world and the effect it had on their child."— Ada
Calhoun, New York Times bestselling author of Also a Poet

For fans of The Glass Castle and The Liars’ Club, a tender, heartbreaking, and hilarious
memoir chronicling the challenges of growing up with a desperately scheming father, a
mother plagued by an acute hoarding disorder, and of parenting her parents while seeking
independence.

Amanda Uhle is the publisher & executive director of McSweeney’s, an independent
nonprofit publisher of distinctive books & magazines. She writes about culture, politics, and
civil rights for the Washington Post, Politico Magazine, the Boston Globe, and Newsweek.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | SUMMIT BOOKS                                            October 2026 | JC


                                         RADIANCE

                                         Ayad Akhtar
                                         352 pp.
                                         Territory: World English
                                         Agent: Julie Barer, TBG Literary LLC

                                         Manuscript Imminent




In his newest novel, Pulitzer-Prize winning novelist and playwright Ayad Akhtar brilliantly
constructs the story of a Muslim-American writer and professor who, after a sinister near-
fatal bike accident, is granted a wondrous and strange new spiritual perspective of the
world, a perspective that becomes essential as he navigates the intense political
atmosphere of the campus and the excavation of his own dark family secrets.

Delving into topics of sexuality, gender, inherited trauma, religion, spirituality, power
dynamics in university settings, and cancel culture, Akhtar’s novel is a sharp yet spiritual
modern work in the vein of Vladimir Nabokov’s Pnin, and a sure addition to the literary
canon.

Ayad Akhtar is a novelist and playwright. His work has been published and performed in
over two dozen languages. He is the winner of the Pulitzer Prize for Drama and an Award in
Literature from the American Academy of Arts and Letters. Ayad is the author of American
Dervish, published in over 20 languages and named a Kirkus Reviews Best Book of 2012, and
Homeland Elegies, named one of the 10 Best Books of 2020 by The New York Times and
winner of the 2021 American Book Award, among other honors.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | SUMMIT BOOKS                                                TBA 2026 | JC


                                        JADED

                                        Anne Meredith
                                        Territory: World
                                        Agent: Sarah Burnes at The Gernert Company
                                        Manuscript Imminent
                                        S&S UK co-pub

                                        Rights
                                        Calmann-Levy (French)
                                        Fischer (German)
                                        Libri (Hungarian)
                                        Record (Portuguese/Portugal)
                                        Urano (Spanish)


Donna Tartt meets EL James in a provocative debut set on a 1980s college campus. Every
year, professors Sam and Vera lure a student into their lives, but this year their target is a
mysterious young woman named Jade who will explode everything they have so carefully
built, forcing them to reckon with a decades-long marriage full of complicity, lies, and lust.

“Anne Meredith joins the company of esteemed women from the last half century who
wrote and published their debut novels at over 40 years of age, including Bonnie Garmus,
Marilyn French (whose The Women’s Room was the first publication of the original Summit
Books in 1977), Julia Glass, EL James, Toni Morrison, and Elizabeth Strout. We are thrilled to
have Anne on our list for this worldwide Summit Books publication.” —Judy Clain, Senior
Vice President and Publisher, Summit Books

Anne Meredith is an American writer who has been writing for film and television for over
thirty years. Her credits include Bastard Out of Carolina, Losing Chase, and Out of The Ashes.
She has won two WGA awards for best adapted screenplay, as well as a Pen USA award and
CableAce award. Jaded is her first novel.
SIMON & SCHUSTER | 37 INK                                                   April 2026| DD
                                        LIKE THE BITTER ORANGE

                                        Milena Palminteri

                                        448 pp.
                                        Territory: World English
                                        Translation rights: Bompiani
                                        English language sample available, full
                                        translation expected in March 2025

                                        “…a supple, ironic, and lively sense of portrayal,
                                        combined with traditional story-telling talents,
                                        make Come l'arancio amaro an extremely enjoyable
                                        read that benefits from the wisdom of a classic novel
                                        while venturing into the difficulties that women face:
                                        past, present, and future…” – Antonella Cilento, La
                                        Repubblica Napoli


Instant bestseller in Italy, with over 100,000 copies in print since publication in June 2024

Agrigento, 1960. Carlotta studied law but was unable to become a lawyer because she is a
woman, and so she has secluded herself in the notarial archive, protecting herself from any
emotions. But one day her past revisits her in the archive, in the form of an accusation
made by her paternal grandmother against her mother: that is, of not having given birth to
her.

Sarraca (Agrigento), 1924. As the black wave of fascism descends from Rome, the
diaphanous Nardina marries the noble Carlo Cangialosi but is unable to become pregnant,
while the beautiful and wild Sabedda, a humble servant, has a child in her womb that she
will not be able to care for. The paths of these two young women will become intertwined
thanks to the devious plan hatched by Bastiana, Nardina’s mother, and by Don Calogero, in a
plan that reeks of mafia-style complicity.

Milena Palminteri was born in Palermo and currently lives in Salerno. There she directed
the notarial archives, after having worked all her life as a conservator in the archives of
Florence, Rome, Caltagirone, and Matera. Since 2014 she has been actively writing in
the Lalineascrive workshops, hosted in Naples by author Antonella Cilento. Come l’arancio
amaro is her first novel.
 SIMON & SCHUSTER | 37 INK                                                    May 2026 | DD


                                          GREAT AND UNFORTUNATE THINGS

                                          Jason Arday
                                          320 pp.
                                          Territory: World
                                          Agent: Ben Clark at the SoHo Agency (UK),
                                          Jennifer Gates at Aevitas (US).
                                          Proposal available.

                                          S&S UK co-pub


At three years old, Jason Arday was diagnosed with global development delay and autism
spectrum disorder. He did not speak until he was eleven years old and could not read or
write until he was eighteen. At age 37, Jason was appointed Professor of Sociology of
Education at the University of Cambridge. He is the youngest Black person ever appointed
to a professorship at the nearly 900-year-old institution.

There has been coverage of Jason's story from major media outlets around the world, read
and seen by millions, and Jason has received over half a million emails from people who
have been inspired by his story.

In Great and Unfortunate Things, Jason will reveal how the inequalities his family faced—
related to race, class, and disability—drove him to become an academic and sociologist. He
will share the lessons he learned while pursuing his dreams in higher education, including
how systemic racism and ableism favor those who more easily assimilate into these spaces
and understand their often-unspoken rules. And he will remind us that a diagnosis, no
matter how dire, is not the end of the road.

Professor Jason Arday is a social commentator, presenter, and public speaker. He is
currently the Professorial Chair of Education (Sociology of Education) at the University of
Cambridge,
CO-AGENTS
Argentina, Mexico, Colombia, Latin America:         Czech Republic, Slovakia, and Slovenia:
       Maru de Montserrat                                 Marta Soukopova
       International Editors Co.                          Andrew Nurnberg Associates Prague
       Provenza, 276, 1st Floor                           Jugoslávských partyzánů 17
       08008 Barcelona, Spain                             160 00 Praha 6, Czech Republic
       Tel: (34) (93) 215-8812                            Tel: 420 222 782 041
       E-mail: ieco@internationaleditors.com              E-mail: soukopova@nurnberg.cz

Baltics (Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Georgia and    France:
Ukraine, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan,                 Vanessa Kling (vanessa@lanouvelleagence.fr)
Uzbekistan, Kyrgyzstan, Turkmenistan,                     Michele Kanondidis (fiction)
Tajikistan):                                              (Michele@lanouvelleagence.fr
       Tatjana Zoldnere:Eastern European and              La Nouvelle Agence
       Asian Rights Agency (EEARA)                        7, rue Corneille
       Tel: (37) (1) 750-6495                             75006 Paris, France
       E-mail: zoldnere@eearagency.com                    Tel: (33) (1) 43.25.85.60
                                                          E-mail:LNA@lanouvelleagence.fr
Brazil:
          João Paulo Riff                           Germany:
          Laura Riff                                     Sebastian Ritscher
          Riff Agency                                    Ronit Zafran
          Avenida Calógeras n° 6, sala 1007              Mohrbooks Literary Agency
          Rio de Janeiro-RJ 20030-070                    Hofackerstrasse 13a
          Tel: (55) (21) 2287-6299                       8032 Zurich, Switzerland
          E-mail: joaopaulo@agenciariff.com.br           Tel: (41) (43) 244-86-26
          laura@agenciariff.com.br                       E-mail: info@mohrbooks.com

Bulgaria, Albania, Romania, Serbia,                 Greece:
Macedonia & Montenegro:                                  John Moukakos
      Mira Droumeva                                      JLM Literary Agency
      Andrew Nurnberg Associates Sofia                   9 Andrea Metaxa Street
      jk. Yavorov bl. 56 - B, floor 1, ap. 9             106 81 Athens, Greece
      1111 Sofia, Bulgaria                               Tel: (30210) 384-7187
      Tel: (359) (2) 986-2819                            E-mail: jlm@jlm.gr
      E-mail: anas@anas-bg.com
                                                    Hungary and Croatia:
China:                                                   Judit Hermann
          Jackie Huang                                   Andrew Nurnberg Associates Budapest
          Andrew Nurnberg AssociatesInternational        Tartsay Offices
          Ltd.                                           1126 Budapest, Tartsay Vilmos utca 4.
          Beijing Representative Office                  Hungary
          Room 1705, Culture Square, No.59 Jia,          Tel: (36) (1) 302-64-51 / 3113968
          Zhongguancun Street                            E-mail j.hermann@nurnberg.hu
          Beijing Haidian District, 100872, China
          Tel: (86) (1) 825-4106
          E-mail: JHuang@nurnberg.com.cn
Israel:                                               Mongolia:
          Beverley Levit                                   Weerawat “Big” Techakijjathorn
          The Book Publishers Association of Israel        Andrew Nurnberg Associates, Bangkok
          29 Carlebach Street                              No. 1, Empire Tower, 47th Floor, Unit 4703,
          Tel Aviv, Israel, 6713224                        Sathon Tai Road, Yan Nawa Sub-district,
          Tel: (972) (3) 561-4121                          Sathon District, Bangkok 10120 Thailand
          E-mail: rights1@tbpai.co.il                      Tel: +66-98-2525-441
                                                           E-Mail: big@nurnberg.co.th
Indonesia/ Vietnam/Maylasia:
      Santo Manurung                                  Netherlands:
      Rights Manager                                        Paul Sebes
      Maxima Creative Agency                                Willem Bisseling
      Beryl Timur No.41                                     Sebes & Bisseling Literary Agency
      Gading Serpong –Tangerang 15810 -                     Herengracht 623
      Indonesia                                             1017 CE Amsterdam, The Netherlands
      Tel. 62-21-5421 7768                                  Tel: (31) (20) 616 0940
      E-Mail: santo.maxima@gmail.com                        E-mail: sebes@sebes.nl
                                                            bisseling@sebes.nl
Italy:
          Erica Berla                                 Poland:
          Berla & Griffini Rights Agency                    Marcin Biegaj
          via Gian Giacomo Mora 7                           Marta Ziolkowska
          20123 Milano, Italy                               Andrew Nurnberg Associates Warsaw
          Tel. +39 0280504179                               ul. Fort Służew 1/41
          www.bgagency.it                                   02-787 Warszawa, Poland
          E-mail: berla@bgagency.it                         Tel: 4860 7636086
                                                            E-mail: Marcin.biegaj@nurnberg.pl
Japan:                                                      Marta.ziolkowska@nurnberg.pl
          Miko Yamanouchi
          Japan UNI Agency                            Russia:
          Tokyodo Jinbocho No. 2 Building                   Olga Lutova
          1-27 Kanda Jinbocho                               Anastasia Falcón Arjarova
          Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 101-0051,Japan                  Andrew Nurnberg Associates
          Tel: (81) (3) 3295-0301                           Stroenie 6, 21 Tsvetnoy Blvd.
          E-mail: Miko.yamanouchi@japanuni.co.jp            Moscow 127051, Russia
                                                            Tel: (7) (495) 625-81-88
Korea:                                                      E-mail: lo.lutova@lit-agency.com
          Jae-Yeon Ryu                                      a.falcon@lit-agency.com
          KCC (Korea Copyright Center)
          Gyonghigung-achim                           Scandinavia (Denmark, Sweden, Iceland,
          Officetel Rm 520, Compound 3                Norway, Finland):
          Naesu-dong 72, Chongno                            Ulf Toregard
          Seoul 110-070, Korea                              Ulf Töregård Agency AB
          Tel: (82) (2) 725-3350                            Meyers plan 5
          E-mail: kcc@kccseoul.com                          S-37433 Karlshamn, Sweden
                                                            Tel: (46) (454) 84340; 708 123
                                                            E-mail: ulf@toregardagency.se
Spain and Portugal:
      Maru de Montserrat
      International Editors Co.
      Provenza, 276, 1st Floor
      08008 Barcelona, Spain
      Tel: (34) (93) 215-8812
      E-mail: ieco@internationaleditors.com

Taiwan:
      Whitney Hsu
      Joanne Chan
      Andrew Nurnberg Associates International
      Ltd.
      Taiwan Representative Office
      4F-7, No. 678, Sec. 4, Bade Road,
      Songshan
      Dist., Taipei 10566, Taiwan
      Tel: +886 2 2562 9008
      E-mail: whsu@nurnberg.com.tw
      jchan@nurnberg.com.tw

Thailand:
      Pimolporn Yutisri
      Tuttle-Mori Agency Co., Ltd.
      6
      th Fl., Siam Inter Comics Building
      459, Soi Piboonoppathum (Ladprao 48)
      Samsen Nok, Huay Kwang
      Bangkok 10320, Thailand
      Tel: (66) (2) 694-3026
      E-mail: pimolporn@tuttlemori.co.th

Turkey:
      Atilla Izgi Turgut
      Akcali Copyright Agency
      Bahariye Cad. 8/9-10
      34714 Kadikoy-Istanbul, Turkey
      Tel: (90) 216-338-8771or
      (90) 216-348-5160
      Email: atilla@akcalicopyright.com
