Specific in relation to the teaching and learning context, Stephens (1996) states planning, liaising,
demonstrating, facilitating, observing, assessing and navigating as all underpinning skills to
achieve mentoring goals. Further, he explains that a mentor facilitates a student teacher’s learning
and development of professional abilities through the process of support with steady and gradual
scaffolding as learning progresses. Thus, tensions may arise in mentoring relationships in
situations where mentors are promoting an overreliance or are disabling the process of
development (Le Cornu, 2005). Further, Burley and Pomphery (2011) indicate that mentors may
adopt both participant and non-participant observation styles to facilitate student teachers’
professional development. Stephens emphasises that the non-participant observation is essential,
in encouraging autonomy and confidence. However, he warns that a mentor needs to adhere
strictly to the non-interventionist idea as some student teachers’ may want to rely heavily on the
prior experiences of the mentor; whether positive or negative to inform practice during the
induction and developmental phases.
The skills identified by theorists and authors within the discipline, reflected by Rhodes et al.,
(2004) defined as ‘skills in the field of human relations’, can be contextualised in schools. This
conception seems a valid benchmark in recognising all activities concerning mentoring as
grounded in interactions between and among people in specific cultural contexts. The skills in
the field of human relations (Rhodes et al., 2004) are as follows:


Establishment of learner’s needs;



Taking account of preferred learning styles;



Ensuring that learning is engaging for the learner;



Assisting in the removal of barriers to learning;



Helping to maintain learner’s motivation;



Monitoring and evaluating performance against personal development plan.

Drawing upon the contexts presented, it would appear that all the qualities and skills identified,
form the conceptual framework for effective mentoring in initial teacher education to occur.
Moreover, arguments have been explored acknowledging that learning and teaching involve
multifarious tasks (Tang, 2003; Strong and Baron, 2004). However, the stimulus for many of
these skills being effective within a mentoring framework stems from effective communication
skills vital in achieving purposeful mentoring (Apple, 2006). Within this context, Apple (2006)
suggests that these skills can act as indicators to supporter teachers to determine the needs of
student teachers, with a view to enhanced personal and professional development. The nature of
90

