 No One Can See Me Cry: Understanding Mental
Health Issues for Black, Asian and Ethnic Minority
  Academics, Professional Staff and Students in
                Higher Education

                     Dr Jason Arday FRSA
         Durham University, Department of Sociology
         Centre for Global Higher Education (CGHE)
                     University of Oxford
                    Thursday 2nd July 2020



                                                      1
A Thought…
• ‘Jason… I know you like music… you know that Kasabian song
  Underdog…

• There is a lyric in that song that perfectly encapsulates racism…

• Your always going to have to lose to ultimately win in attempting to try
  and overcome this horrible thing… the end result is inevitable altered
  mental state and trauma…’

                                  (Male, Mixed-Heritage, Academic, 15).
                                                                         2
A Thought…
• ‘It is exhausting being a Black person in higher education, the racism
  and discrimination you continually experience from mainly White
  people in the end pushes you to the precipice of madness…

• … all your thinking to yourself is come on… No can see me cry… pull
  yourself together and just try and get through it. It’s wrong, its just so
  wrong…’



                                 (Female, Black, Professional Staff, 11).
                                                                           3
The BAME Mental Health Experience…
• According to mental health charity MIND (2013) Black, Asian and Minority
  Ethnic (BAME) communities continue to experience differential outcomes
  within the United Kingdom (UK) mental health system despite increased
  attention on the area…

• The trauma of racism for BAME academics, students and professional staff
  within higher education remains problematic against a backdrop of cultural
  and organisational institutional racism (Arday, 2020).

• Within higher education (HE), BAME staff and students consistently face
  barriers in terms of accessing contextually appropriate mental health
  intervention that recognises sophisticated nature of insidious racism in
  all its overt and covert manifestations (Arday, 2020; Arday, 2018)

                                                                           4
Framing the Context…
• This discussion forms part of a qualitative mental health study
  which attempts to illuminate experiences of racial
  discrimination regarding BAME individuals within the
  Academy and impact upon mental health…

• The continual and residual trauma faced by Black, Asian and
  Minority Ethnic (BAME) individuals encountering racial
  discrimination requires a particular set of psychological
  interventions that help to unpack the violence of those
  racialized experiences… (Grey et al., 2013).
                                                                5
Experiencing Racism in the Academy…
• The correlation between continuous encounters of racism within the
  workplace and the effect on physical and mental well-being for BAME
  individuals within the higher education sector is hardly surprising particularly
  given the paucity of psychological interventions in dealing with this trauma
  (Memon et al., 2016; Myrie and Gannon, 2013).

• The physical and mental well-being of BAME individuals within the sector
  remains an after-thought, which sadly becomes intensified at the height of
  crisis, often exacerbating feelings of anxiousness, isolation and
  marginalisation (Palmer and Ward, 2007).

• The cumulative effect of facing racialized episodes requires further
  examination as we begin to illuminate discriminatory patterns regarding
  mental healthcare experiences for ethnic minorities (Arday, 2020).

                                                                                 6
The casual instrument of discrimination…
• For many BAME individuals within higher education, they will often have to navigate the
  institutionally racist and inequitable terrain of academia…


• This habitually coincides with a normative and causal integration of insidious and subtle
  racism, in the form of racial mirco-aggression (a cumulative and covert form of racism involving
  conscious and intentional actions or slurs) and hyper-surveillance which among many other
  discriminatory tropes renders ethnic minority individuals as less capable (Rollock, 2011).


• This context becomes further exacerbated particularly when considering the lofty, egalitarian ideals
  often espoused by universities (Arday, 2019; Shilliam, 2015).


• These ideals often become contradicted, as universities continue to be complicit perhaps more
  than other institutions within British society in maintaining and sustaining racial inequality
  (Alexander and Arday, 2015).

                                                                                                     7
The lived experience…
• ‘I have found myself ignoring these symptoms and letting this build and
  build. The isolation… I experience as a Black person in the
  Academy is debilitating, you end up residing in this prism which
  becomes a downward spiral…

• … Consequently, the violence of these racialized cultures affects your
  mental wellbeing… In my own person case it resulted in a nervous
  breakdown and me self-harming to gain some semblance of
  control back that had been taken away from me…’

                             (Female, Mixed-Heritage, Academic, 21).

                                                                        8
Marginalisation…
• ‘I have worked in my department for 3 years and there has always been a
  conscious effort by my White colleagues to ostracise me and keep me on
  the margins of everything…

• … You end up suffering a kind of double violence when you then go and
  speak to a healthcare professional at university that thinks you are being hyper-
  sensitive or paranoid, it is really disconcerting and makes you feel even
  further isolated when you cannot rely on mental health professionals to
  assist you in your time of need. You say something… and it’s like here we
  go again… Black person talking about race…’


                                                  (Male, Black, Academic, 27).

                                                                                  9
Isolation… Victimization…
• ‘I am the only student of colour on my degree programme… and to
  be honest my White counterparts make me aware of this and so do
  my lecturers…

• … I am made to feel inferior and this results in a horrible anxiousness
  that I experience everyday resulting in panic attacks and ultimately just
  not attending, for fear of encountering this everyday, all day in
  lecturers and seminars…’

                                            (Female, Asian, Student, 2).
                                                                         10
Considerations and Recommendations…
• The need for targeted psychological interventions to better support ethnic
  minorities in conceptualising and dealing with their racialized experiences is
  pivotal, in an attempt to stay ahead of more sophisticated and pernicious
  forms of racism (Arday, 2020; Suresh and Bhui, 2006).

• The relentless, daily encounter with racial discrimination is a nuanced and
  complex experience that requires contextual psychological interventions
  such as cognitive behavioural therapy, mindfulness-based cognitive
  therapy or eye movement desensitisation and reprocessing (Lamb et al.,
  2012; Sewell, 2012).

• Such interventions must coincide with a more diverse pool of healthcare
  professionals aware of the impact of racism and attempts must be made
  where prevalent to not decentre racism as the problem (Arday, 2020).

                                                                              11
Forthcoming Paper…
• Arday, J. No One Can See Me Cry: Understanding Mental Health
  Issues for Black and Ethnic Minority Staff in Higher Education
  (Higher Education: Under Review).




                                                               12
