Special Issue Editorial: Race and Educational Leadership: The influence of research methods and

critical theorising in understanding representation, roles and ethnic disparities




                                                                                                  1
Guest Editors Names/Institutions



Introduction


In 2020 the murder of an unarmed African-American man (George Floyd) in Minneapolis in the

United States of America (USA) at the hands of a white police officer (Derek Chauvini) triggered anti-

racism (Black Lives Matter) protests across the world. Since then, attention has been turned to

education institutions with questions raised as to the number of non-white staff in leadership roles

and the type of leadership positions they occupy (Author et al., 2021; Doharty et al., 2021). This was

followed by calls in the UK to tackle structural racism and racial inequalities in higher education

(Advance HE, 2021). This special issue commenced before this global scrutiny. It is concerned to

better understand racialised leadership experiences through the research methods and theories

employed by researchers to surface those experiences. However, its coming to fruition was affected

by another global event, the Covid-19 pandemic (outlined in Liu, Kuo and Shih, 2020) which affected

both the article authors and guest editors were affected to varying degrees by. This collection is

therefore a testament to the determination of the authors to complete their articles and contribute

to knowledge production regarding the vital contribution the leaders discussed within make to

educational leadership and the strengths essential to enabling them to perform the roles that they

do, and in maintaining those positions. It also sheds light on the challenges that will need to be

overcome if more individuals are likely to take on the mantle of being senior leaders in schools and

higher education. Before turning to the racialised leadership experiences profiled here, we set out

the background to the special issue and what we sought to achieve.


In English higher education Black, Asian and Minority Ethnic staff account for 10.3% of the staff

population. They are underrepresented in senior academic and university leadership positions (both

academic and professional services). This is particularly evident at senior manager (0.4%), vice

chancellor and professorial level (ECU, 2014; Singh and Kwhali, 2015; UCU, 2016; HESA, 2019, 2020;



                                                                                                       2
Advance HE, 2020). When professorial numbers are broken down by ethnicity this equates to: Asian

3.6%, Chinese 2.2.%, Other 1.3%, Mixed 1.2 %, Black 0.6% (Advance HE, 2020). Notwithstanding, the

underrepresentation for Black, Asian and Minority Ethnic female professors is even greater as

attested to by Baroness Valerie Amosii who shared her experience of higher education meetings and

stated that ‘in a typical gathering of 100 professors, 90 would be white and there would be just two

BAME [Black, Asian and Minority Ethnic] women’ (Universities UK and NUS, 2019 p. 10; see also

Rollock, 2019). Like higher education, Black, Asian and Minority Ethnic staff are underrepresented in

senior school leadership positions in England; combined they account for 6% of deputy and assistant

headteachers and 3.6% of headteachers (DfE 2020; see also DfE, 2018; NASUWT, 2017). Challenges

for non-white staff in securing school leadership positions is an on-going concern (e.g., Belgutay,

2016; Miller, 2016, 2019a/b; Tereshchenko, Mills and Bradbury, 2020).




Leadership inequality is equally evident and has been experienced by indigenous communities and

visible minorities in Canada (Smith, 2017; Trought‐Pitters, 2018; Statistics Canada, 2019) and people

of color in the USA (Howard and Gagliardi, 2018; McChesney, 2018; Gooden and Howard, 2021). An

annual report by the College and University Professional Association for Human Resources (CUPA-

HR, 2020) in the USA found that of nine areas of leadership responsibility in higher education ‘racial

and ethnic minorities’ have greater leadership roles in three areas: fiscal affairs, athletics and

research/health science, and of these three, have the greatest representation in fiscal affairs (28%)

compared to athletics (11%) and research/health science (11%). Like ‘racial and ethnic minorities’

Black and Hispanic women tend to have greater leadership roles concerned with fiscal affairs, while

least represented in external affairs (Bichsel et al., 2019). Interestingly, when compared to the USA

population and the four-year college educated population men of color are under-represented in

staff, professional, faculty and administrative roles whereas women of color are under-represented

in administrative (-2% e.g., Provost, President, Dean) and faculty (-3% e.g., assistant professor,

tenured full professor) leadership roles (McChesney, 2018). Despite such under-representation,

                                                                                                         3
Black women had long held leadership positions in faculty and administration in Historically Black

Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) as opposed to predominantly white higher education institutions

(AAUW 2016). Black women’s occupation of leadership roles in American higher education is not

however, replicated to the same extent at school level, as only 1% are school superintendents

(AAUW, 2016). Inevitably, people of color in leadership positions in the USA tend to occupy such

roles in institutions where they are responsible for overseeing the educational outcomes for often

marginalized student populations (Gooden and Howard, 2021) and in the UK, at the professorial

level they are more likely to be employed in less highly rated higher education institutions (Advance

HE, 2020). Regardless of where racialised leaders are employed as argued by Howard and Gagliardi

(2018) they are essential to schools, higher education institutions and students who attend such

institutions being successful. Indeed, they can make a vital difference in their career possibilities.



Existing knowledge about race and educational leadership (e.g., Khalifa et al., 2016; Author XXXX and

XXXX 2018; Bush, 2019) supports calls for more information to be made available regarding

racialised educational leadership practices and experiences. A recent international edited collection

(Courtney et al., 2021) concerned with generating understanding about models and theories of

educational leadership ‘across the world’ and promoting critical thinking, afforded Gooden and

Showunmi (2021) an opportunity to highlight the salience of race and the interplay between race,

power dynamics and educational leadership in the USA and the UK. In short they contend that the

ways in which educational leadership is operationalised in local, national and international

organisational contexts cannot be fully understood if race is ignored.


To date racialised leadership experiences in the public domain have largely centred on individual

micro rather than macro experiences in schools and higher education institutions, and have largely

been reflected in journals such as, the International Journal of Qualitative Studies in Education,

Ethnic and Racial Studies, Race Ethnicity and Education, and Qualitative Psychology, Advancing

Women in Leadership Journal, among others. Although publishing their employment experiences in

                                                                                                         4
journals (e.g. Lander and Santoro, 2017), racialised leadership experiences in the UK (while generally

given less attention) are more likely to be found in edited collections which focus on one area of

education (e.g. Author XXXX, 2015: Gabriel and Tate, 2017; Author XXXX, 2018; Miller and Callender,

2019), in single authored books (e.g. Ahmed, 2012; Bhopal, 2018) and/or small-scale commissioned

organisational studies (e.g. Bhopal, 2014; Fook and Nath, 2019; Rollock, 2019). Nonetheless, such

publications powerfully articulate the perspectives and micro-aggressions encountered by non-white

staff in educational leadership positions.


However, an under-researched area is racialised leadership experiences contextualised in part

through the roles occupied and leadership strategies utilised (Miller, 2016), and the research

methods/theoretical approaches employed in accentuating diverse racialised leadership

experiences, and the strategies they employ. This is a key aspect of the articles discussed here,

together with considering the salience of the research approach employed, researcher

background/interactions/interpretations (Burt et al., 2018; Pringle and Booysen, 2018; Fook and

Nath, 2019) in enabling racialised education leadership experiences and strategies to be fore-

fronted. This approach is essential because when empirical leadership experiences are reported,

greater emphasis tends to be given to the experiences with less attention given to the methods

and/or researcher background/approaches/positionality which are central to generating new

insights into the ‘how’ and the nature of leadership practice (Foldy, 2009; Gooden and Showunmi,

2021). Moreover, Lumby and Morrison argue that when researching leadership, researchers should

have a ‘secure sense of which methods or tools will suffice, since it is the relationship between

epistemology, methodology, and tools or methods which gives research its intellectual credibility

and legitimacy’ (Lumby and Morrison, 2010: 9). Further, they observe that if diversity leadership

issues are to be brought in ‘from the periphery to the mainstream … a leap in the innovative and

creative use of theory and method will be needed to dent the current habitual modes of research

and practice’ (Lumby and Morrison, 2010: 13). A similar message is echoed in Stanfield’s (2016)

edited collection which calls for an understanding of the methodological approaches that

                                                                                                     5
researchers employ when researching race and leadership in education, and by Pringle and Strachan

(2015) who advocate understanding research into leadership experiences which ‘take into account,

intersecting identities, global influences, theory and organisational applications’ (Pringle and

Strachan, 2015: 53, cited by Pringle and Booysen, 2018: 20).


Research concerning race, education and leadership and that is concerned with surfacing and

addressing inequality is usually underpinned by a social justice, critical and transformative

perspective as exemplified by critical race theory which has its roots in American legal studies (see

detail in e.g., Ladson-Billings, 1998) and has increasingly been applied in the UK to understand

racialised experiences in education (e.g., Gillborn et al., 2017; Lander and Santoro, 2017;

Warmington, 2020). This theoretical framework favours the qualitative approach which allows for in-

depth research and analyses of human experiences (Author XXXX, 2011). CRT scholars view

storytelling as pertinent to such understandings and to generating new racialised insights, especially

pertaining to the double or multiple consciousness influencing the how of people of colour’s

educational leadership (Chapman et al., 2019). Equally, storytelling is deemed a method of

resistance with the result being the counter-story which is defined as:


        a method of telling the stories of those people who experiences are not often told. …The

        counter-story is also a tool for exposing, analysing and challenging the majoritarian stories of

        racial privilege. Counter-stories can shatter complacency, challenge the dominant discourse

        on race, and further the struggle for racial reform. … within the histories and lives of people

        of color, there are numerous unheard counter-stories. Storytelling and counter-storytelling

        these experiences can help strengthen traditions of social, political and cultural survival and

        resistance (Solórzano and Yosso, 2016: 133).


Counter-storytelling has four key functions:


        a) They can build a community among those at the margins of society by putting a human

        and familiar face to educational theory and practice, b) they can challenge the perceived

                                                                                                          6
        wisdom of those at society’s centre by providing a context to understand and transform

        established belief systems, c) they can open new windows into the reality of those at the

        margins of society by showing possibilities beyond the ones they live and demonstrating that

        they are not alone in their position, d) they can teach others that by combining elements

        from both the story and the current reality, one can construct another world that is richer

        than either the story or the reality alone’ (Solórzano and Yosso, 2016: 136).


Counter-storytelling ‘highlights the nuances of the lived experiences that are designed to debunk

myths and challenge misconceptions of oppressed peoples’ (Berry and Cook, 2019: 91). Solórzano

and Yosso (2016) also point to the importance of counter-storytelling as an analytical framework for

educational research (p.127). They contend that:


        when the ideology of racism is examined and racist injustices are named, victims of racism

        can find their voice. Furthermore, those injured by racism and other forms of oppression

        discover they are not alone in their marginality. They become empowered participants,

        hearing their own stories and the stories of others, listening to how the arguments against

        them are framed, and learning to make the arguments to defend themselves (Solórzano and

        Yosso, 2016: 129).




Counter-storytelling thus gives voice and strength to communities of color as ‘the locus of power in

the research process’ is shifted to ‘situating subjects as knowers’ (Pillow, 2003: 187, cited by

Chapman et al., 2019: 98). Indeed, much leadership research has tended to be individualised or

small-scale, often derived from interviews, focus groups and reflective journals (Lumby and

Morrison, 2010). Notwithstanding, its commitment to individual/group storytelling, some CRT

scholars have turned their attention to the ability of quantitative research to generate sufficient

understanding about racialised experiences within education (e.g., Gillborn, 2010). Specifically,

Garcia, López and Vélez (2018:150) asked ‘can quantitative methods long critiqued for their inability



                                                                                                        7
to capture the nuance of everyday experience, support and further a critical race agenda in

educational research?’ Key difficulties raised about quantitative research when investigating racial

issues are that:



        The centrality of racism as a complex and deeply rooted aspect of society …. is not readily

        amenable to quantification; numbers are not neutral and should be interrogated for their

        role in promoting deficit analyses that serve White racial interests; categories are neither

        ‘natural’ nor given and so the units and forms of analysis must be critically evaluated; voice

        and insight are vital: data cannot ‘speak for itself’ and critical analyses should be informed by

        the experiential knowledge of marginalized groups (Gillborn, Warmington and Demack,

        2018: 158).


Interestingly, while these authors contend that quantitative research is not objective (as researchers

bring their biased positions to the data collection and analysis) and consider ‘statistical analyses [to]

have no inherent value’, they suggest it ‘can play a role in struggles for social justice’ (Gillborn,

Warmington and Demack, 2018:158; see also DeCuir-Gunby, Chapman and Schutz, 2019). This

suggests that different types of methodological approaches can inform new understandings of race

and leadership in education.


Aims


We sought to examine:


•   Ethnic representation and disparities in educational leadership;

•   Research approaches and theoretical frameworks used to make visible the racialised experiences

    of leadership staff in school and higher education and allow marginalised voices to be heard;

•   The educational contexts in which racialised leaders operate and the ‘how’ of their leadership

    practice and impact;




                                                                                                         8
•   The effects of race/ethnicity on the perceptions of leadership, actions in leadership and

    approaches to the reality of race/ethnicity; and

•   Leadership/power and institutionalized inequities - how these are resisted and the possibilities

    for transformation of racialised leadership.




Provided is a nuanced and richer understanding of the studies conducted to comprehend their

everyday realities, the numbers in leadership positions, progression experiences combined with

comprehending the policy changes required to increase the number of racially diverse staff in

leadership positions and transform their experiences.




Light is shed on racialised leadership in school and higher education in diverse geographical and

educational contexts of England, Canada, America and South Africa. The centring of educational

leaders’ lived experiences and their voices are prioritised alongside the research methods

(phenomenological, longitudinal, documentary, semi-structured interviews), analytical (content and

textual analysis) and theoretical approaches (CRT, critical ecological) used to illuminate the nuances

associated with race and educational leadership in schools and higher education. The prism of race

enables us to add new educational leadership insights to the field associated with ethnicity, gender,

culturally constructed notions of leadership, intersectionality (Crenshaw, 2019) and/or geographical

location. The findings highlight implications for researching race and educational leadership.



Articles




Six articles are featured: two provide insights into school leadership and four higher education, and

of the four, three interrogate Black women’s leadership. Combined, the articles interrogate the

complexity of race and racism experienced in educational leadership, development of anti-racist

leadership practices and support earlier contentions that educational leadership cannot be


                                                                                                         9
separated from leaders ‘backgrounds, social identities and/or earlier knowledge’ (Pringle and

Booysen, 2018:32).


With the first article attention turns to leadership in Canada. Wendy Cukier, Patience Adamu,

Charlie Wall-Andrews and Mohamed Elmi’s article - ‘Racialized Leaders Leading Ontario

Universities’ uses a critical ecology systems model approach with a dataset of 324 academics to

identify individual (e.g. bias, perceptions and choices), organisational (e.g. norms, recruitment,

support teaching, learning and research) and societal (e.g. policies, programmes, stereotypes and

culture) factors that account for the under-representation of senior leaders including presidents and

provosts in Canadian universities in Ontario, despite a fifth of the university population coming from

racialised communities, and universities having expressed commitments to diversity and inclusion. In

common with findings in the UK (e.g., Advance HE, 2020) their findings suggest that the more senior

non-white academics become the less likely they are to occupy the highest positions, which is also

reflective of their experiences in the wider society.


While Cukier et al’s article identifies factors affecting recruitment, the second article by Crasha

Townsend - ‘Identity politics: Why African American women are missing in administrative leadership

in public higher education’, illuminates retention challenges experienced by five Black women

administrators at director-level at predominantly white higher education institutions in the USA.

Through phenomenological inquiry and CRT these Black women’s counter-narratives explain how as

well as constantly having to prove their ability to justify their employment, they experienced their

authority being questioned and they endured extra time-consuming workload which the author has

deemed a ‘Black tax’ (e.g., ‘being on multiple committees to ensure a voice of color is present,

mentoring students of color, being the “fixer” of problems on campus, and navigating issues around

racism’). They were overly scrutinised and experienced promotion and self-identity challenges which

meant that rather than bringing their ‘authentic’ selves (Goffman, 1959) to work they filtered and

considered carefully, the type of ‘work self’ (including how they dressed, styled their hair and spoke)



                                                                                                       10
they put into the public domain. While Townsend’s study is filled with leadership challenges, the

how of the women’s leadership is underpinned by their caring (‘Black tax’) roles.


The third article by Nuchelle Chance – ‘A phenomenological inquiry into the influence of crucible

experiences on the leadership development of Black women in higher education senior leadership’

continues the focus on identity politics. It illustrates the salience of adopting a phenomenological

approach to qualitatively investigate the resilience identities that a group of Black women bring to

their leadership roles as vice-presidents, presidents and provosts of a 4-year college or university in

the USA, and how such resilience becomes transformative and is utilised in further enabling them to

develop their leadership roles. These resilience identities are grounded in adverse personal lived

experiences (e.g., physical, sexual, verbal assault/abuse, bullying, discrimination, poverty, being

raised by a single parent, family bereavement, and health issues) encountered by these senior

leaders as children and during adulthood, and which are brought to the surface through application

of Bennis and Thomas’s (2002) ‘crucibles of leadership theory’. Chance found that these women

leaders used severely adverse personal experiences and the knowledge of how they overcame them

to develop leadership qualities, progress and survive in higher education. Also crucial to such

understandings is how Black women presidents/provosts use their experiences to help support and

promote leadership in the next generation of Black women leaders.


The fourth article by Natasha Johnson – ‘Balancing race, gender, and responsibility: Conversations

with four Black women in educational leadership in the United States of America’, continues with the

spotlight on leadership identity in American higher education; specifically, intersectionality between

race and gender, and balancing Black women’s senior leadership responsibilities with equitable,

social justice leadership. Through in-depth interviews/storytelling and hermeneutic phenomenology,

the impact of race and gender on Black women’s leadership ability and capability to perform at the

highest levels in higher education is examined. The article illuminates the women’s reflections on

how the intersection of their raced and gendered identity enabled them to successfully navigate the



                                                                                                       11
highest levels of the educational leadership sphere in which they are underrepresented. Johnson

concludes with a call for more research specific to the intricacies of Black women’s leadership

journeys in American higher education.


Moving from higher education to school leadership the fifth article by Pontso Moorosi – Colour-

blind leadership policy: A critical race theory analysis of school principalship standards in South

Africa, combines content analysis with CRT to examine the role of school principalship standards in

addressing issues of race in South African educational leadership, and preparing future school

leaders. Through the application of CRT, the analysis reveals that even in a majority Black country

there is no explicit reference to ‘race’ and ‘ethnicity’ as social constructs in the principalship

standards. Emphasis is placed instead on the concepts of ‘diversity’ and ‘culture’ which reflects

government prioritising of difference rather than educational inequality. Moreover, Moorosi

contends that the policy for School Principalship Standard is colour-blind leading to a lack of

recognition of school principal power in shaping ‘race’ dynamics in schools. Content analysis

enthused with CRT also helps to elicit policy denial of the existence of racism, as opposed to its

entrenchment. Consequently, the school principalship standards cannot effectively prepare South

African school principals to foster anti-racist leadership practice.


The final article by Lauri Johnson – ‘Portraits of UK Black and South Asian Headteachers five years

on: Leadership retention in the age of academisation’, completes the focus on school leadership.

Adopting a longitudinal life history approach, Johnson re-interviews a group of Black and South Asian

headteachers of schools in England, five years after she first interviewed them as new headteachers,

to understand the impact of educational policy (related to governance and financial control of

educational provision) on their career decisions, progression and development of their professional

identities in the intervening period. Johnson reveals how Black and South Asian headteacher school

leadership can be affected by the type of school that they lead, and result in professional




                                                                                                      12
experiences which cause them to reflect on what it means to be a leader. Johnson examines the

implications of these school leaders experiences for school diversification and retention.


To conclude, Berry and Cook (2019: 86) contend that ‘telling stories of one’s experiences can provide

important lessons for the future’. The stories of educational leadership shared here contain salient

lessons for improving the educational leadership experiences of people of color. We hope these

articles inspire you to further research the influence of race on diverse, visionary and self-assured

educational leaders.




                                                                                                        13
References


AAUW (2016) Barriers and bias: The status of women in leadership. Washington DC: AAUW.




Advance HE (2021) Understanding Structural Racism in UK Higher Education: An introduction.

London: Available at: http://www.advance-he.ac.uk (accessed 2 April 2021).




Advance HE (2020) Equality and higher education staff statistical report. Available at:

http://www.advance-he.ac.uk (accessed 2 April 2021).



Ahmed S. (2012) On Being Included: Racism and Diversity in Institutional Life. Durham: NC: Duke

University Press.



BBC News (2021) Derek Chauvin conviction: 'This is monumental. This is historic. Available at:

http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-us-canada-56824330 (accessed 20 April 2021).




Belgutay, J. (2016) ‘We’re losing the fight for more black principals’. Times Educational Supplement,

1 January 2016. Available at: https://www.tes.com/news/further-education/breaking-news/were-

losing-fight-more-black-principals (Accessed: 10 March 2016)




Bennis WG and Thomas RJ (2002) Geeks and Geezers: How Era, Values, and Defining Moments Shape

Leaders. Boston MA: Harvard Business School Publishing.



Berry TR and Cook EJ (2019) Critical race perspectives on narrative research in education:

Centering intersectionality. In DeCuir-Gunby JT, Chapman TK and Schutz PA (eds.) Understanding

Critical Race Research Methods and Methodologies. New York and London: Routledge, pp. 86-96




                                                                                                    14
Bhopal, K. (2014). The Experience of BME Academics in Higher Education: Aspirations in the Face

of Inequality. London: Leadership Foundation for Higher Education.



Bhopal K (2018) White Privilege: The Myth of a Post-Racial Society. Bristol: Policy Press.




Bichsel J, Pritchard A and McChesney J (2019) Professionals in Higher Education Annual Report: Key

Findings, Trends, and Comprehensive Tables for the 2018-19 Academic Year. CUPA-HR. Available at:

https://www.cupahr.org/surveys/results/. (Accessed 23 March 2021).




Burt B, Williams K and Smith W (2018) Into the storm: Ecological and sociological impediments to

Black males’ persistence in engineering graduate programs, American Educational Research Journal,

55(5): 965-1006.




Bush T (2019) Talent, determination, and resilience: Leadership accession and enactment for black,

Asian, and minority ethnic leaders. In Miller P and Callender C (eds) Race, Education and Educational

Leadership in England. London: Bloomsbury, pp. 81-97.




Chapman T, Hartlep N, Vang T, Lipsey-Brown T and Joseph T (2019) Not one, but many: A CRT

research team approach to investigate student experience in racially diverse settings, in DeCuir-

Gunby, JT, Chapman, TK and Schutz PA (eds) Understanding Critical Race Research Methods and

Methodologies. New York & London: Routledge, pp.97-108.




Courtney SJ, Gunter HM, Niesche R and Trujillo T (eds) Understanding Educational Leadership.

London: Bloomsbury.




                                                                                                    15
Crenshaw, K. (2019) On Intersectionality: The Essential Writings of Kimberlé Crenshaw. New York:

The New Press.



DfE (2018) School leadership in England 2010 to 2016: characteristics and trends. London: DfE.




DfE (Department for Education) (2020) School Workforce in England, November 2019. Available at:

https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/department-for-education (accessed 1 May 2021)



Doharty N, Madriaga M and Joseph-Salisbury R (2021) The university went to ‘decolonise’ and all

they brought back was lousy diversity double-speak! Critical race counter-stories from faculty of

colour in ‘decolonial’ times. Educational Philosophy and Theory, 53(3): 233-244.



ECU (2014) Equality in Higher Education: Statistical report. London: ECU




Fook, J. & Nath, V. (2019) Mindsets, Paths and Identities: The Experiences of Senior Black, Asian and

Minority Ethnic Leaders in Higher Education, London: Advance HE




Gabriel D and Tate SA (eds) (2017) Inside the Ivory Tower. London: UCL Institute of

Education Press.



Garcia N, López N and Vélez VN (2018) QuantCrit: Rectifying quantitative methods through critical

race theory. Race Ethnicity and Education, 21(2): 149-157.



Gillborn D (2010) The colour of numbers: Surveys, statistics and deficit-thinking about race and class.

Journal of Education Policy, 25(2): 253–276.




                                                                                                    16
Gillborn D, Warmington P and Demack S (2018) QuantCrit: education, policy, ‘Big Data’ and

principles for a critical race theory of statistics. Race Ethnicity and Education, 21(2): 158–179.



Gillborn D, Demack S, Rollock N and Warmington P (2017) Moving the goalposts: Education policy

and 25 years of the black/white achievement gap. British Educational Research Journal 43(5): 848–

874.



Goffman E (1959) The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life. New York: The Overlook Press.




Gooden M and Showunmi V (2021) Race and educational leadership. In, Courtney, SJ, Gunter, HM,

Niesche R and Trujillo T (eds) Understanding Educational Leadership. London: Bloomsbury, pp.281-

294.




HEPI. (2017). Reality Check: A Report on University Applicants’ Attitudes and Perceptions.

Available at: https://www.hepi.ac.uk/2017/07/04/reality-check-report-university

applicants-attitudes-perceptions/ (accessed 23 November 2017)




Higher Education Statistics Agency (HESA) (2019) Higher Education Staff Statistics: UK, 2017/18.

Available at: https://www.hesa.ac.uk/news/24-01-2019/sb253-higher-education-staff (accessed 22

March 2019).

Higher Education Statistics Agency (HESA) (2019) Higher Education Staff Statistics: UK, 2018/19




Howard E and Gagliardi J (2018) Leading the Way to Parity Preparation, Persistence, and the Role of

Women Presidents, American Council on Education. Available at:

https://www.acenet.edu/Documents/Leading-the-Way-to-Parity.pdf (accessed 29 March 2021)




                                                                                                     17
Khalifa M, Gooden MA and Davis JE (2016) Culturally responsive school leadership: A Synthesis of

the literature. Review of Educational Research 86(4): 1272-1311.



Ladson-Billings G (1998) Just what is critical race theory and what's it doing in a nice field like

education? International Journal of Qualitative Studies in Education 11 (1): 7-24




Lander V and Santoro N (2017) Invisible and hypervisible academics: The experiences of Black and

minority ethnic teacher educators. Teaching in Higher Education 22(8): 1008-1021




Liu Y-C, Kuo K-L and Shih S-R (2020) COVID-19: The first documented coronavirus pandemic in

history. Biomedical Journal 43: 328-333



Lumby J and Morrison M (2010) Leadership and diversity: Theory and research. School Leadership

and Management 30(1): 3-17



McChesney J (2018) Representation and Pay of Women of Color in the Higher Education Workforce

(Research report). CUPA-HR. Available from: https://www.cupahr.org/surveys/research-briefs/

(accessed 24 March 2021)


Miller P (2016) ‘White sanction’, institutional, group and individual interaction in the promotion and

progression of black and minority academics and teachers in England. Power and Education (8)3:

205-221.


Miller P (2019a) BAME Teacher Progression in England: Towards a Conceptual Model. International

Studies in Educational Administration 47(3): 18-35


Miller P (2019b) Race and ethnicity in educational leadership. In: Bush T, Bell L and Middlewood D

(eds) Principles of Educational Leadership and Management. London: Sage, pp. 223-238


                                                                                                      18
Miller P and Callender C (eds) (2019) Race, Education and Educational Leadership in England: An

Integrated Analysis. London: Bloomsbury.



Olson R (2021) What are the charges against ex-Minneapolis police officer Derek Chauvin in the

killing of George Floyd? Star Tribune 18 March 2021, Available at: //www.startribune.com/derek-

chauvin-charges-trial-george-floyd-murder-manslaughter-police-minneapolis-

minnesota/600030691/) (accessed 10 April 2021)



Pringle JK and Booysen LAE (2018) Contextualising the EDI research agenda in the larger social

sciences research landscape. In: Booysen LAE, Bendl R and Pringle JK (eds) Handbook of Research

Methods in Diversity Management, Equality and Inclusion at Work. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar

Publishing, pp. 19-35.




Rollock N (2019) Staying Power: The Career Experiences and Strategies of UK Black

Female Professors. London: University and College Union. Available at:

https://www.ucu.org.uk/media/10075/Staying-Power/pdf/UCU_Rollock_February_2019.pdf




Sablan J (2019) Can you really measure that? Combining critical race theory and quantitative

methods. American Educational Research Journal 56(1): 178-203.



Smith M (2017) Action needed to close the leadership gap in Canadian universities. Edmonton:

Academic Women’s Association, University of Alberta.


Singh G and Kwhali J (2015) How can we make not break black and minority ethnic leaders in higher

education? Stimulus paper, London: Leadership Foundation for Higher Education




                                                                                                  19
Solórzano D and Yosso T (2016) Critical race methodology: Counter storytelling as an analytical

framework for educational research. In: Taylor E, Gillborn D and Ladson-Billings G (eds.) (2nd edition)

Foundations of Critical Race Theory in Education. New York and London: Routledge, pp. 127-142


Stanfield II, JH (2016) (ed.) Rethinking race and ethnicity in research methods. London and New York:

Routledge.




Tereshchenko A, Mills M and Bradbury A (2020) Making progress? Employment and retention of

BAME teachers in England. London: UCL Institute of Education



Trought-Pitters E (2017) Black educational leadership: The state of the art in Ontario elementary

schools. 1: Actes du Jean-Paul Dionne Symposium Proceedings. Available at:

https://uottawa.scholarsportal.info/ottawa/index.php/sjpd-jpds/issue/view/287 (accessed 4 April

2021)




UCU (University and Colleges Union) (2016) The Experiences of Black and Minority Ethnic Staff

in Further and Higher Education. London: UCU.



Universities UK and National Union of Students (2019) Black, Asian and Minority Ethnic Student

Attainment at UK Universities: #Closing the Gap. London: Universities UK and NUS.




Warmington P (2020) Critical race theory in England: impact and opposition. Identities, 27(1): 20-37



Whitford E (2020) Who Holds Professional Positions in Higher Ed, and Who Gets Paid? Available at:

https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2020/05/06/report-details-gaps-women-and-minority-

professionals-higher-ed (Accessed 2/4/2021)




                                                                                                     20
i
   On 20 April 2021 ex-police officer Derek Chauvin was convicted of the murder of George Floyd in Minneapolis,
Minnesota. He was found guilty of three charges - second-degree unintentional murder, third-degree murder
and second-degree manslaughter (for an explanation of the different charges see Olson, 2021). The verdict
marks a pivotal moment in American history and African American peoples’ fight against systemic police
brutality and racial injustice, as it is rare for a white police officer to be convicted of killing a Black man
detained in police custody (BBC News, 2021).
ii
   Baroness Amos was appointed Master of University College, Oxford in 2019. She is the first Black College
head.




                                                                                                            21
