Hi, it's Nick Hawkes, and welcome to the second episode of Talking Matters. Now, some extraordinary
lives are high profile and widely documented, and others less so. Sitting in the latter category
is the incredible life of Jason R. Day. Unable to speak at 10 years of age and still unable
to read or write till he was 18, the odds of him becoming a trailblazing academic were
extremely slim. Yet he is. That he might raise a million pounds for charity 10 years
ahead of his own schedule would also be unpredictable. But such is his amazing life. Humble, engaging
and inspiring, I enjoyed the pleasure of talking to Jason in 2021. And whilst the conversation
happened some time ago, the story is as impactful and inspiring as ever. So please like, share,
review or do whatever positive thing you might care to. If you find this conversation
useful, it all helps. Thank you. Right, enjoy. So Jason, welcome.
Welcome, Nick. How are you? Are you well?
Yeah, I'm all right, man. I'm pretty good, actually. Today was nice, just to give listeners
a bit of context. We're recording this. We're still in the sort of lockdown phase, but we're
sort of just emerging, blinking from it in a way. And we've had a little bit of nice
weather lately. And I'm pretty good because a bit of nice weather has had a big effects
or a big positive effects on me. So I'm, I'm in decent shape, decent shape. How about you,
man?
That's really good to hear, Nick. I mean, you know, what's really interesting is, you
know, when people say like the weather has an impact on my mood. I mean, that's not the
same for me. But we'll say this when you're kind of stepping into the glorious sun, you're
thinking, do you know what, something about that? There's something in that because, yeah,
everyone's mood just completely lifted and walking around, you're seeing people kind
of a bit lighter in spirit, if nothing else. So it's great.
It definitely does make a difference. And in this sort of conversation, I think we'll
in a bit, we'll move into the more historical sort of factors that shape you and the things
that you experienced on your journey. But maybe first, we can just talk about like the
last year. So while we're in this phase of lockdown and talking all about that, what
are the main things that you've learned? Do you think in the last year, what have you
done away, having learned from this crazy period that we've all lived through?
That's great. I mean, to be honest, Nick, I think the thing that I've learned the most
is I never was someone that took things for granted. But I think, you know, friendships,
people, you know, once we come out of this madness completely, I'm definitely going to
cherish it even more than I already did. And I think that's a huge thing. I think preservation
of of self and other people, I think is really important. Recognizing that we're all in a
really fortunate situation in some way, shape or form, I don't think we'll ever get this
period of time again. So I think while it has been really difficult, I also think it's
been massively advantageous in terms of allowing people to reconnect with family in a way that
they may not have been able to before, because we're all on that hamster wheel of work. So
I mean, for me, I think it's always been important to draw out the positives from it. I think
there are some negatives clearly. But I think the positives are, you know, I've been able to
integrate and engage with family in a way that and friends actually, you know, in a way that
is quite novel. And it just it kind of is another string to all of our bows in terms
of how we maintain relationships with people. And I think, actually, there's been something
quite beautiful about this year, just life slowing down a little bit. Yes, it's been
difficult with school teacher, you know, at home teaching and all these things. But
actually just seeing London at a standstill, well seeing the world at a standstill, but
being London, seeing London at a standstill in the day and at night, because you only
get that perspective at night very often, but to see it in the day, it's quite something.
So I actually think it's been good. We've seen things that we literally thought that
we never could or would see. We thought it was impossible for international flights to
sort of slow down, to traffic to slow down, and all the rest of it. It's been weird. I
mean, one thing I've felt is it one thing it's taught me is that I'm always going to
have fairly big to do this because I kind of for many years thought if I have like the
time if there's a bit, you know, if I'm not running around, blah, blah, blah, get through
the to do list and it'll be like, but even through this whole year, I've still had quite
a lot of things on the to do list. And now I've come to the realization I think I'm going
to get carried out by the handles one year, one day in the future, hopefully many decades
to come and I'll hopefully die with quite a big to do list still. But I'm all right
with that now, because that just means like I'm involved in doing stuff, which is good.
I've got into it was bad before, but you know, 10 things on the to do list, I'll do
to tick them off and then give myself a treat for doing nothing. So yeah, you just make
the to do lists realistic. That's one thing I've learned from this period.
Yeah, so I think we've all learned from the last year. And then you've had this incredible
journey, it seems where I presume you must have been consistently learning as various
sort of things happen. I wonder if we could kind of scroll back a bit. It sounds like your
earliest years were pretty challenging in the sense that my understanding is that you couldn't
speak till you were 11. So for the first sort of phase of this discussion, can you just tell me
why was that and what was going on there? Yeah, of course. So I suppose it's it's kind of been a
really crazy, full stop. But it's the embryonic stages of this craziness kind of really
stem from when I was three, I was diagnosed with autism. So I had a hybrid of autism, which was
Asperger's syndrome, and global development delay. So obviously, there are kind of particular traits
that people associate with Asperger's, which kind of are not really atypical, I think different
autistic people experience these traits in different ways. But I guess with global development
delay, that's more solidified in terms of, you know, it's basically a delay of particular milestones
and motor skills at particular ages and cognitive skills. So I signed and had speech therapy until
I was 11. So, you know, the way I would converse was through sign language, and had speech therapy
from the age of three to 12. But I said my first word when I was 11. So I wasn't a selective mute.
I just literally, you know, I couldn't speak and we're a global development delay, but with a delay.
Yeah, there's a delay when you do things. So whereas, you know, an age for formulating words
may normatively be, you know, one and a half to two years old, I didn't get that experience until I
was until I was 11. And so my first word was hello, at 11. And wow, so this began. So what kind of
schooling were you? What was your education up until age 11?
Yeah, so I went to a special needs school, right? Up until I was until the year three or four.
And then went to a mainstream school. So then in South London, and that was kind of a strange
existence. Because obviously, you know, I was conversing with people by myself wasn't able to
verbalize. So people are conversing with me, sorry, but I wasn't able to verbalize or talk. So
that was a different experience. And actually, to be honest, you know, I always say this,
there's something pretty beautiful about being able to see the world in a different way and not
being able to converse with people, because in that situation, or at least the positive spin that
was kind of always, you know, purported to me was that you're listening, you're learning, you're
using other skills and other ways of communication to engage with people. So, you know, I don't know
if that was all by default or designed. But I mean, it worked out pretty well in the end.
Well, clearly, clearly, it's worked out well in the end. And you're now an Associate Professor and
your Deputy Executive Dean at Durham University. So this is, it's incredible the way that it has
worked out. But at the time, I mean, I'm assuming in your, let's say your early teens, it must have
been very difficult, mustn't it? Yeah, I think that's when you kind of, you know, as my dad
always says, people always mock what they don't understand. And you kind of you meet people and
bearing in mind up until the age of 11, you know, I wasn't, you know, my mum was a huge
influence on my life. And I was just told I wasn't made to feel any different. So when you go into,
you know, your kind of adolescence and your teenage years, and you're told you're different,
you know, you start thinking about why am I different from everyone else? Why does my brain
work in a different way to everybody else? And also, because people tell you, you know, so teachers
tell you more, the difference is when I was being told as a, as a up until 11 year old, I didn't
always understand what people were saying. But as you become a bit more cognitive, and you're
beginning to develop slightly more and more, you actually understand what people are saying to you
and you realize pretty quickly, they're not nice things. Would you say you were you were bullied
in that, you know, that kind of age zone? Yeah, I mean, for someone to bully someone,
not all the time, but I guess in my case, that they would, you know, they would have to be a
sense that I felt like I was being bullied. I mean, I had such a strong sense of self at 14,
13, I don't think I took that on, I just recognize that to be other people's problem. And, and I was
and I was okay with the way I was. And, you know, the one thing that I really hold on to is that I
don't, you know, I think a lot of people go through life and they really care what other people think.
But when I was 14, which is the age when you probably would care what people think I never
did. And so it kind of really set me up well for later adulthood and where I am now. And it's
something that I try and I think it's different. I think there's a lot of things that have changed
from when I was 40 and 35. Now, I mean, there are a lot of things, but I think that sense of self
was different because I was into different things as well. Like, so, you know, I was obsessed with
like, mud culture, I'm talking to these mud culture, like clothing. Yeah. And, you know, my favorite
band was Oasis. And if you're a black kid from South London, you know, those things are kind
of not au fait and not in fashion. So, you know, so it didn't, you know, it was one of those things
where those are the things I was into, you know, I loved, obviously I loved football,
played snooker and football to a really high level. Yeah. But for me, it was, you know,
the most important thing was being true to myself. And so I didn't really, you know,
I didn't give the petrol or the right of field needed for those flames to come up in terms of
what people would say to me because it really was of no interest. It's interesting that you talk
about music and kind of developing a sense of comfort with being a bit different because we
had a conversation with Groove Rider very recently for Trailblazers, the other podcast that I do,
which you're aware of. And Groove was explaining basically that he was a punk and he was saying,
yeah, you know what I mean? Like being a black guy and, you know, where I grew up, it just wasn't
really the dumb thing to be into punk music, you know, but he said, I just kind of, you know,
I just was okay with it. It's just like, this is what I'm into. This is what I buzz off. And so,
hey, almost like this is me and everybody else just, you know, you kind of need to deal with
it a little bit, something like that. Maybe it was a bit of something similar, perhaps going on with
you there. Yeah. I mean, it wasn't even something that, you know, when people say like you grow into
a pair of trousers or a pair of shoes or you lean into it, it's just what I was like. I liked rock
and roll music a lot, not a little bit, a lot. And for whatever reason, you know, when I heard the
opening tenets to, you know, rock and roll star, yeah, it's an alcohol, something just ignited
something in me. It was that idea that you could have like these, you know, five working class
men, cunean guys that basically were like, we're going to take on the world and win, you know, and
I don't know, there was something about, you know, them that you look at and you think, well, if they
can do that, why can't I take on the world and win? Admittedly, at that point, I had no idea what that
might look like. Yeah. But the important thing was having the psyche that you could probably
entertain that as an idea. And that in itself, when you're 15, 14, 15, that's quite powerful,
because at that point, you know, the only person, the person that I had to kind of really
embed that was my mum and she was she was fantastic at that. And she, you know, my brothers are very
different to me and they got very different interests. But yeah, it was what I liked. And,
you know, even as a 35 year old now, I don't have any vices, I don't drink, smoke or do drugs.
Right. Well, I do waste a lot of money on tailoring.
Everybody's got a vice man, you just go, you just go seek it out. Yeah, this is a nice
shirt is presumably one of yours. Nick, it's more than a nice shirt. I'm not joking. Like,
when I was 14, my dad bought these two posters and a massive posters and one was of Oswald
Boating and one was of Paul Weller. Yeah. And I kind of said to him, who are they? Who are they?
And he was like, well, that's Oswald Boating. And that's like the first one of the first or one of
the only black people to have a shop on several row. Yeah. This one's Paul Weller. He's part of
a band called like the Jam or Star Counts or something. Yeah. So I said, I'd love to dress
like that. And he said, Well, you're gonna need a really good job. And a lot of money stress that
out because one's a tailor and one only is clothed in tailoring. Yeah. So from that day onwards, I was
like, I'm gonna look like that when I'm older. Okay. And that's where and that's kind of where
all the obsession with it all started with the kind of tailoring the shoes and all that. It was
really funny, because I do a lot of sport, but I only own like probably one pair of trainers,
but I've got probably 70 pairs of shoes. Interesting. Really interesting, man. Yeah.
So it sounded like you were developing your own kind of set of aspirations and quite unique.
My understanding is that you, again, with the form of autism that you had, that meant that you
only learned to read and write at the age of 18. Am I right? I did. Yeah, I did. So I did learn to
read and write, do learn to read and write at the age of 18. And that in itself, I mean,
it's an interesting thing, because I don't think anyone saw that coming.
Oh, no, that is interesting. So you think that people were surprised that you actually developed
those skills people thought that you maybe you will never learn to read and write.
Yeah. And also, I guess the thing that should caveat all of this is that I don't know if you've
seen a program called seven up. Hmm. But it followed you at seven, five, yeah. And so basically,
I had a study done on me from the age of three to what would end up being 25. And so
it's educational psychologists and a team of psychologists that would work that worked with me
and my mom and my dad to kind of really, I guess, in many respects, they kind of adopted this
mystic Meg persona where they predict where you would be. And so that whole thing was at 18,
you know, Jason can, you know, get a job working two or three hours a week where he can get work
experience, you know, and maybe when he's 25 to 30, he can live in shared accommodation with other
people with kind of special educational leads on learning disabilities, that would be an achievement.
And my mom was kind of like, no way, no way that's had no way. And, and then I don't know it, you
know, it took time to obviously learn to read and write. And in many respects, you know, the infancy,
you know, there was a very infinite component about it, you're reading books that are for
three and four year olds at 18 and trying to learn. So there's a whole load of learning that
I've missed out on. So even now, there's times when I asked my kind of 14 year old daughter,
you know, what's a verb or what's an adjective, which she finds incredible. She's like, you know,
you write books for a living. Like, why do you write books for a living? But you don't,
you know, you write policy documents for parliament. You don't know what those things are,
which is which is the truth. So I wouldn't, you know, you make allowances or you can or you kind
of, it's part you skip, you're not part, you don't skip them deliberately, but you make up
what you don't know. And I mean, not literally, as in, you know, yeah, you find a way you find a way
of dealing with the situation, I guess, right? Yeah. And it's not unique to me. I think we all
have ways of finding mechanisms and coping mechanisms to deal with stuff. So it's not unique
to me. It's just that I guess, you know, I tried to utilize what I, you know, I knew I didn't have
a lot of strengths. But I thought the ones I did that try and refine them and make them as good as
possible. And that coincided with meeting my tutor at college called Sandro, who was like,
he was instrumental, like he basically was I'm going to turn you into a winner. That in fact,
that is the words he said to me, I'm going to turn you into a winner. When did this person say that
when I was 18? Yeah, so, you know, we my mom had tried to we went to a place called Connections,
which was in Clapham Junction at the time. So this is this is around 2002. And we went in there. And
part of Connections, they've all closed now. But part of their remit was, you know, they did the
careers they provide, they provide you or find or give you career options. And so they said,
Jason skill set, and obviously all the things you've outlined, I think the best option Jason
will have, I think is if he can, you know, if he works in a supermarket a few hours a week.
And my mom had heard this for like, you know, four or five years. So by this point,
there's a monotony to this. And you have a bunch of more and more tempered about it.
But she was like, Jason, get your bag, let's go. And stormed out, stormed out. And I was still
behind. She, you know, did this really dramatic entrance through the door. And I was kind of
languishing behind her. And I remember grabbing me with like, kind of both hands, she's like, Jason,
you have to find it from somewhere to make something of your life. Otherwise, this is what
people are going to they're going to predict. This is what people are going to predict for you.
There's no hope of what you're going to do. You've got, you know, it's only so far I can take you,
Jason. And so we went to Merton College, which is based in Morden. And my mom found this course,
and she was like, right, it's a sport diploma course, you're doing it. And I was like, I,
you know, there's no way I can I'm out of my depth. I'm not going to be able to do this.
Also, I want to practice. So, you know, I've got snooker tournaments, primes coming up, I want to
practice at that. No, no, no, you're not spending 10 hours in a snooker hall. You're good, Jason.
But I don't know if you're going to be a professional. And if that fall, if that goes
tee up, then I'd love you have something to fall back on.
Let's just quickly before we move on from that, though, you you were successful, though. This is
the interesting thing at the age of 18 when when people were saying this guy is not going to
amount to anything, both in snooker and in football, correct me if I'm wrong, you had managed to make
an impact and and achieve quite a good level already. Is that right? I had. Yeah. So I was at
I was at a professional club at time and then 18 went into some professional games. So I ended up
kind of I wasn't going to go. Sorry, I've got a button. Which team were you? Which protein were
you involved with? Crystal Palace. Crystal Palace. OK, yeah. All right. So at the time,
and it was really funny because obviously one thing they don't tell you about these situations,
there are a lot of streams in terms of like in youth football, a lot of streams and
actually out of most youth setups, very few people kind of go up. So I was only at Crystal
Palace for a handful of years. But I was never going to I was never going to really progress
on to, you know, big things because one, there were a lot of physical attributes I didn't have.
And two, it's all about actually what's between the years. And I just didn't I didn't have it to be
I wasn't good enough to be a professional footballer. OK, but but I could apply that
attitude playing kind of non league football and played non league football for I think 12 years,
12, 13 years after that. OK. And what about the snooker skills? How did you develop? How did you
did you say you ended up as a sort of you were close to potentially being a professional snooker?
I was a lot closer to that. Yeah. And that was like that was what does that happen?
Well, so I mean, listen, another part of maybe I may have learned to read and write quicker and
I spent more time in school. So I mean, the snooker. Yes. 11 to 18, 19, probably. Yeah.
But seven hours a day. OK. And a lot of the professionals are on TV now played a lot of
them in prime. So I spent a lot of time in prostatin in Wales. So in Wales, they had this
the best juniors would meet for this tournament at Pontins in prostatin. I've been there actually.
Yeah. Not not to the snooker, but I went to like a sole weekend there, you know, in the,
you know, in the old days. And and so, yeah, you spent a lot of the best juniors, which a lot of
them are kind of doing really well as pros now. And yeah, I mean, I was good. The problem is,
is that if you can go to a table and you can make. So this is like we're talking 17 years ago.
So you go to a table and you can make 50 or 60. You know, that might seem all right. But the
problem is, is that you've got, you know, I was playing 11 year olds that you'd get 60 in front.
So they haven't got the ball yet. And then they dish up and clean up with with with an 87 break.
Yeah. And they're standing on boxes. Right. The table. Right. They're doing more than seven hours
a day. These kids presume God knows what's going on with them.
Yeah. Well, to be honest with you, Nick, and in some cases, they're not even doing seven hours.
They're doing like three. But I think there's a big difference between being naturally gifted
and having natural ability. And that was I was the latter. I had some natural ability
but to work really hard at it. And when you're playing kids that are like supreme, I remember
playing, you know, Judge Trump in a tournament as the kid and and got my ass handed to me. Yeah,
badly, badly. I mean, I imagine traveling all the way up to Wales from London. And then literally,
I think I broke off twice and got born ill. But it made like two or three centuries in a space of
like 20 minutes. It was just I remember sitting there thinking I'm not going to be good. And I
could either be a poor earning pro. Yeah. Or I need to really think about if this is what I
should be doing for a living. And at that point, I realized that that wasn't what I should be doing
for a living. Okay, well, I tell you what, though, it does strike me as interesting that you were
able to make some positive developments, though, in two different areas at this age. Because,
you know, there may be a lot of people who go through what you did, just don't have the
breakthroughs in any areas, maybe. So that's quite interesting. But anyway, back to this story,
your mom, I think is about to drag you out of the connections place or something.
Yeah, so she drags me out of this connections place. And it's kind of really funny, because,
you know, she kind of puts two hands on me. And she says, like, Look, you need to find a way to,
you know, we need to we need to do something here, we need to find a way to otherwise, you know,
your life is going to really ebb away from you. Because you know, these psychologists don't have
great predictions for you, Jason. So I'm kind of like, okay, right. So she found this course at
Merton College. And there I've become acquainted with a gentleman called Sandro Andres Andrie.
So from Cudetiba, Brazil. And he was he was brilliant. He was brilliant. Like he his first
question to me was like, you know, are you willing to work hard? So I was like, yes. He was like, I'm
gonna tell you something, I'm gonna tell you two things. So I said, Okay, he's like, I think you
could get to university in two years. So I burst out laughing because at the time, my mom was in
our final year of university. And I had a rough idea of what it was. But I couldn't even spell
university. So I was kind of thinking, well, you know, where are we going with this? And then he
said, like, I'm gonna, you know, I think we can take on the world and win. I'm gonna make you a
winner. I was thinking, wow, like, you know, I didn't know why he was saying this to me. And I
didn't know if this was something he said to everyone. But but yeah, I was completely taken
aback. And you know, he said, All I need you to do is you need to listen and try your best. And so
that's why I did. I did listen. And I tried my best. And it was amazing, because we saw kind of
these incremental improvements. Bit by bit by bit. But his whole thing was the same obsession that
you've channeled, particularly into snooker, you need to channel that same obsession because I
didn't really have the same session with I love football, I love sport, I love football. But it
came more naturally to me than snooker. The obsession was the reason why mom got me into
it is because there are some obsessive tendencies that might like as part of my autism that I have
that lend itself well to snooker. But the idea of repetition and repeating the same technique
over and over again. And my mom was in many respects quite innovative in that context.
Sanjay was like, we got to take all of these skills. And he said, you know, you've got a finite
amount of skills, Jason, you know, he said, I'm gonna be honest with you. And I'll tell you,
you've got a finite amount of strengths. But you know, rather than improve spending time wasting
any more time improving your weaknesses, let's make these strengths as amazing as we can.
Yeah, that is brilliant, man.
Yeah, because I mean, up until that point, my whole life, I'd been told, Jason, let's work on
your weaknesses. And like, you know, all I was doing was losing more and more confidence,
they weren't really improving. And that's basically what he did. And, you know, I don't know, he just,
he just really made me believe myself in a way that I not really experienced before. I don't know,
he kind of made me feel good about myself. And, you know, and that kind of carried on into adulthood.
Fantastic. And two questions about this gentleman. Well, first of all, are you still in contact with
him? Yeah, I am. Yeah. I mean, Sandra is my son's godfather. And I've known, yeah, we've been in,
I mean, we've been in contact, I mean, up until recently, might I add, but like,
we've probably been in contact every day from the age of 18 to 30, well, 35. Yeah.
That is fantastic. So you're in contact, which is great. And I just wonder how,
how does he feel about the journey that you've undertaken this guy must be must find it the most
beautiful thing. It's weird, because I guess he's always kind of, he's always kind of been the silent
observer. I mean, there's something there's a lot to be said for kind of, because people only ever
see the other end of the, the other side of the coin, right? They see the end of the race. So they
don't know what things happened from, from the start to the end. And they just see the end. So
they don't know what happened in between. And I think he often just sits there and thinks, you know,
I guess he thinks he's surreal, but in many respects, he could probably lay claim to be one
a few people that he didn't doubt. He, he thought that's how things could be. So it's not really a
surprise to him. His whole thing is like, you know, what can we do for other people? You know,
what can you do for other people, me specifically, you know, and can you maintain the same humility
and integrity you had when I met you at 18? And I think that's that, you know, it's not a challenge
for me, but it's something that, you know, I think it's easy to do when you don't have any success.
I think when you do start becoming successful, I think that's a really different thing altogether.
How wonderful. I'd be interested to meet him at some point, actually, you never know down the line.
Yeah, he's brilliant.
Yeah. So then you got your diploma, I'm assuming in sport, was it sports science, something like that?
Yeah, it was sport and exercise science. And it was the first educational thing that I'd achieved
that it was, it was an amazing feeling, because I never just never thought I'd be in that situation.
And no GCSEs, no A levels, obviously.
No, yeah. And then getting into kind of university was a bit of a, it was still a blur, even when I
say it was a blur, it was just a surprise. I remember kind of being in my first lecture, and
and it's like 300 people in this lecture room. And it was really, I mean, listen, I could just
about do anything. So we're talking 20 years old, with a reading age of about 10 or 11. And I
remember my first exam at university. And I remember saying this room for 300 people, the
lecturer says, you know, someone puts a hand up, as if everyone passed, everyone passed, they're
like, yeah, yeah, yeah, everyone's part, I mean, there is one person who hasn't passed. So everyone's
like, who didn't pass, who didn't pass? And like, I mean, well, I mean, to be honest, yeah,
that they just about spelled their name. So I'm sat there in my, I'm sat there and like, this kind
of person to person lecture, everyone kind of packed in like sardines. And I'm kind of like,
I definitely did more than spell my name. And so imagine 300 people going out of lecture,
there's only one entrance they can all go out of. So it's going to take some doing to kind of say,
you know, Nick, can you stop here for a minute, please? So anyway, the lecturers found me and
kind of said, Jason, can I just speak to you for a minute? So at this point, like, I'm really
apprehensive, because I'm thinking what's up, what's happened there? And she says, is there
any reason why you got like, nine percent on your exam? And I and I said, what I kind of stuttering,
I was like, I don't know, I don't know. And she was like, did you revise? Did you try? I was like,
that was my best effort. That was my absolute best effort. What was sorry, what percentage did you get?
Nine percent in this exam.
Nine. Okay, so she didn't know. So okay, so she was, I guess she didn't know your backstory.
She didn't know she didn't know any of it. So, so I kind of I guess in that situation,
I was forced to explain it, because at that point, you know, they were going to relieve me from the
course. They were kind of like, look, to be honest, you this is this is a really drastically low
score, desperately low. And it seems like you're a little bit out of your depth. So, you know,
you know, we can help you go back to college and maybe and it's kind of like, so at that point,
you know, I didn't want to say what the actual issue was, but then I had to explain it. Obviously,
legally, then the university had an obligation to helping me. They had to they had to help me again
with the Discrimination Act. So yeah, that I guess that's how that story ended. And then,
yeah, just before you move on, which university and what was the course?
That was great. So I went to St Mary's University College in Twickenham. Yeah. And I did physical
education and with education studies. Okay. That was and that was a great time in my life,
because I'd been to St Mary's as a 14 year old, right. And never in my wildest dreams did I ever
think six years later, I'd end up going there as a student. So there's kind of a symmetry with
certain things that kind of happened in my life. And that was, and that was one of them said I was
pretty cool moment to be able to go there and to want to have a great time, but to do really well
there. So this 9% score and the teacher going, well, you're out of your depth. How did you
manage to first of all, what kind of degree did you come away with in the end?
Yeah, so I actually, I mean, not I've got over it, really, 13 years later, but I finished with
finished on 69.9. So they did a round out to a first overall, which, which killed me.
You always got first.
I always got first. Yeah.
Wow.
But the module that killed me was a module called physical activity with older adults.
Okay.
And at the time I was going for a sabbatical position. So, so athletic union president.
And so I was really fixated on winning this election. I took my after ball with this
particular assessment and I got like, it was the lowest mark I'd got in a year and a half, got 58.
And I remember subsequently a couple of years later, I went back to work at St Mary's and I
told the, I told the friend of the, you know, the lecture, my lecture at the time, he became my
friend, the guy called Dean either. I said to him like, um, Dean, you know, this module cost me like
a first, you know, cause it was still, the module was still there. So I hate this module. This module
cost me a first like Jason, if you just said to me, I need one more percent, I would have given it
to you. So you told me that like, at that point, it was like seven years later. Oh my God. Like,
so yeah, that was quite funny. But, um, you know what, man, I think you did well to go from 9%
in your first test and then basically a first give a take a half percent or whatever was an
incredible achievement in its, in its own right. So, so what it seems to be the pattern here is
it was a, an achievement to kind of get the, the Merton college stuff that you were overachieving
there. Then you were possibly in some people's eyes overachieving getting into university.
And then probably some people might've said that you were overachieving compared to what they would
have predicted. Certainly the, the educational psychologists who had made predictions, let's say
seven years, 10 years before to potentially come out of uni with a first there or there abouts,
again, a sort of over achievement maybe compared to what some people would have thought. So are,
with this overachieving, are you now starting to believe that, hey, achieving more than other
people say that I will is entirely within my capability? And are you starting to believe that
not necessarily because the belief isn't for me to measure myself against anyone at that point,
because I just knew that I was, you know, one thing I've always been is a really good loser,
as my brothers all say. So I've always been very gracious in defeat and I try and be gracious when
I win. And I'd been so used to losing died. I had long given up the premise of comparing myself to
other people in fact, never really did it. So it was more about me trying my best. I wasn't so
obsessed with how far I got over the line. I just wanted to get to the line. That was the most
important thing. And if I could just get, you know, if I, yeah, if you can shoot through the line,
fantastic. But for me, even if I crawled over the line, it was that whole idea about trying my best,
you know, you got that fantastic speech in any given Sunday about Al Pacino, where he talks about
life being this game of rinses, you know, and he has been eat all around us. And for me,
it was always about how many inches could I, you know, put get in my favor? How, you know,
it was the things that, you know, I knew that I didn't have the same capabilities as a lot of
people. So I knew I could make up for that by being honest, you know, and working really hard.
And I thought, you know, it means pushing yourself to limits. So there are times where,
you know, something that might take a very short amount of time to do because of how my brain
works and some of that slow it can be, it take longer. So it means you've got to dig in more,
bite down on your gum shield a little bit more. And, you know, there's a lot of attributes I
didn't have. But the one thing I knew is I knew I was tough. And, and that goes a long way when
you're, when you have the the plaits of attributes that I had, then being tough helps a lot. At least
mentally being really mentally tough. So there wasn't anything that I, I could enjoy just about
everything. Because I knew that the outcome would always be that I would find a way. And there was
a there was a massive reassurance I'd taken took from that, that was really instilled in me.
By my mum, but more lately, Sandra.
So then you've got you've got your degree. So I'm guessing you maybe 20. Are you 21 years old?
At this point, 23 by this point, so I went to uni at 20 years at 23 by this point.
And so you come out with your degree. And what do you want to do with your life at that point?
That's really interesting. I mean, by that point, I'd already I mean, I had a really life changing
experience when I was 18, which was probably the most important thing that happened to me.
So when I was 18, my mum took me my brothers to a homeless shelter for Christmas. And I had upon
going to his homeless shelter, you know, my brother stayed for a couple of hours and I stayed,
I think the entire day. And I met this guy who sadly had lost his family in a road accident and
became destitute and was sectioned and ended up homeless. And he was a professor. And he said to
me to look at me, you wouldn't think I was anything important. And I hadn't made any judgments on him.
You know, but he said to me, you wouldn't think I was anything important. But you know, I used to
be a professor and I lost my family road accident. And you know, I had a breakdown. I started taking
drugs to deal with it. I didn't go to work. He explained all of these things to me. And
you know, he ended it by saying, you know, to look at a person, you just never know. So never make a
presumption that, you know, all homeless people are drop kicks. You just take drugs. There's always
a story behind this. Now, I hadn't presumed anything, but I think he really wanted to
illustrate and hammer home that point that, you know, not everything is how it seems.
And so at that point, I wanted, I became fixated with this idea of I wanted to dedicate my life to
helping people. So I wanted to raise a million pounds for charity before I turned 40. So that
became my big obsession. So when I got to 23, you know, by that point, I had a one and a half year
old daughter and I just became really fixated with this idea of doing work of charity. So I did my
EGC at that time, which is my teacher training qualification, went on to teach physical education
GCSE and A level at school and then a college. And then I did my first masters,
20, I was 24, 25 at the time. And did my second masters at 26. But then that coincided with the
kind of first big marathon event I've done. So for charity event I've done, so I've done several
little charity events, but I did this particular one, which is where I think a lot of the momentum
and notoriety came for doing charity work. So I ran 30 marathons in 35 days. So that was unbelievable,
man. Yeah, thanks for your kind of you. So that was in 11, it will be 11 years ago in July. I was
20, because I was 26 at the time, or 25 at the time. Yeah, that was an amazing experience,
because obviously, the caveat to that was that we had to do each one in under five hours.
And that's tough. So I mean, yeah, to do it. Yeah.
Did you say you ran 30 marathons in 35 days?
Yeah.
That's insane.
So and obviously, I mean, and I think maybe there was a weak difference between
Eddie's are doing it and myself doing it. But you can walk a marathon in about eight,
eight and a half, seven or half, eight hours.
Yeah, but I need to have a week off after that.
Yeah, so it was really funny, because I remember, you know, when we were kind of deciding what we
were going to do, you know, it's like, yeah, Betty's, I was just on this. And my friend was like,
yeah, but he's walked the marathons. Like, if you're gonna do this, Jason, you need to do something
that's distinctly different. So how about like, you're doing under four and a half or five hours
every day. And you know, we were working with a lot of my friends with physios at the time,
they're like that, like a lot of toll on the body. But to make it uniquely different,
we had to do something that separated it from that. Yeah. So yeah, we're fortunate enough to
do that. And then that kind of, you know, done that, we raised a lot of money from that,
which was fantastic. So it was for shooting stars chase at the time in shelter, because at home,
this was a huge, interesting for me.
Quick question. When you were hitting points, you know, they talk about hitting the wall,
or whatever. So you're running a marathon, I can't keep running it. But I presume that happened. And
then you would presumably push through it, I'm going to keep on keeping on. Where do you find
the depths of strength to keep yourself going? When either you start to think, No, I can't do
this. Now, that's either in the physical sense of like your marathon running, or in some of your
academic journey, where do you find the how do you manage to dig deep enough to keep on keeping on?
I don't know. I think, I mean, I love Rocky. So like, I just think it's a great metaphor for life.
And in Rocky for he says to his son, when you go one more round, when you think you can't,
sometimes that can make all the difference in your life. Now, I don't want to kind of trivialize it
to that. But I do think there's something to be said for pushing through something when you think
you can't do it. And for me, you know, I had a really perverse love of adversity and being in
difficult situations and really seeing how I responded to that. So well, this is interesting.
So you actually kind of got a buzz off putting yourself in those, those points where you knew you
were going to be challenged. Yeah, it massively aroused me like because I didn't really learn
anything about myself and things were going well, you know, the one thing I always was obsessive
about was this idea of temperament and what I was like when things didn't go my way, and how you
respond and how you react to that. And that's what I mean about being tough. I, you know, it was this
idea that I never saw it as a disadvantage to experience adversity. I always saw it as a
privilege because it all for me, it would always be the other end of you know, the other end of it
is you're not in that situation and you don't experience a tough situation. Sometimes,
adversity is a privilege. You know, you're in a situation where, you know, you've got a lot of
people relying on you, you know, you could raise astronomical amounts of money for charity. And
that money is going to change people's lives in quite a big way. Like it's a privilege to have
that responsibility. And so at that point, no matter how painful it was, I knew that that money
could, you know, potentially do a lot of damage in a good way, five to 10 years, whereas I knew
the damage, whereas I knew how I was feeling right now. Yes, it was painful when I was in
absolute agony. It was temporary, it wouldn't last. Whereas this particular feat, in terms of helping
people, not in terms of inverting the mirror on myself, or as an exercise in narcissism,
I just knew it would, it can make a big difference to people's lives. And so for me, it was more,
and the thing is, when you're running with yourself, that there is no hiding place in that situation,
you know, you can't, you know, yeah, there are times where you've got your oyster card in your sock,
and you're like, Joe, I just I can't do this. But you know, you recognize that at that point,
it started off really small, you know, the amount of people who had interest in it. And
before we knew it, it kind of grew to this national thing where a lot of people were interested in
the story, I was doing it, and more and more people are running with me and, you know, a PR
team got involved, and then it just went kind of crazy. And then I remember kind of, I was running
one day and I saw a paper, it was the Metro, and then it might have been the Telegraph,
the Telegraph and the Metro. And I saw someone had done an article on it. I was like, how did
they know about this? And no one had asked me anything. It was the PR company that got a hold
of it and got it to distribute. And I'd seen two papers within maybe about a mile and a half for
another, covering the story. And so I was running past people in like central London,
past the statue of Eros, which is where we finished in Bick
Hill. So that was a year after. And then there was Edinburgh to London in six days. So 600 miles,
700 miles, something in six days. And yeah, we reached the target when I was 30. And I guess
you reached a million pounds. Yeah, when I was 30. And
hold on a second, 10 years ahead of schedule. 10 years ahead of schedule. Yeah. So that was like
a really big thing because we raised a huge amount for the Edinburgh to London. And at the
moment, we're on 4.5. So it's been like an amazing journey. And I guess there's only,
my friends often joke like Jason doing a charity event is like paying rent, honestly, every other
month. So there's a lot of things that they've done to help that. And I got the opportunity to me,
Andy Murray in 2012. Yeah. And he, you know, he, you know, supported a lot of the charity events
that we did as well, in terms of kind of using social media platforms, and then you got some
coverage around it. So more businesses got involved in stuff. And, and yeah, and it kind of all
culminated with running with the Olympic torch in 2012. So that was like, that was like the most
surreal moment. Wow. Purely because like, yeah, how often do you have like,
a flame on the end of your hand that's like over 1000 years old. So that was never in my case,
Jason. And I don't think it's gonna happen. But, but you never know. But I think unlikely.
No, so that was yeah, that was so that was the kind of headline, I guess. And then kind of all,
I guess it all went through, I ended up doing a PhD.
Well, well, I'll tell you what, before we talk about the next stage, I just want to
scroll back a little bit. So we didn't really talk about your sort of surroundings too much
growing up. But correct me if I'm wrong that you might have been pulled into some criminal behavior
or whatever, perhaps, am I right with some of the people that might have been in and around you as
you were growing up, I read something about a conversation that you had with somebody who was
like a gang leader or something on those lines. Yeah, I mean, I was really fortunate. I had two
amazing parents who really kept me and my brothers away from all of that. But I grew up on a really
tough, self-unden cancerous fate. And there was a lot of gang related, drug related activity. And
it's, it's all important to say that, you know, a lot of these people, you know, were unbelievably
gifted, unbelievably gifted. And it just goes to show when you don't have, when there is an
absence of people to nurture your talent in the way that Sondro did with me, that can that can be
hugely impactful. Yeah. And so I remember I was 15, I might just before I turned 15 at a time, and
I was going down to my local snook club. And the there was a there was a drug dealer who was kind
of like, I don't want to use the word kingpin, but they were quite, you know, quite as far as
that kind of environment goes, let's just say they were very senior authority. And he actually
he turned around to me and he had this kind of convertible Mercedes, beautiful car, beautiful
car. And I remember, you know, he stopped me and I was kind of like, if anyone sees me, I'm going
to be in serious trouble because they say it takes a village to raise a child and I know
they're going to be telling my mum, my mum's like, why are you talking to that guy? And he turns
around and says, like, listen, you see this kind of fancy car I've got, you've seen this lifestyle
I have, you can do better than this, make sure you keep your head in your books and make sure you
keep your cue in your hand, which is exactly what he said. And literally, like maybe one or two
months later, he was dead, he was murdered. So that was quite a surreal experience, because,
you know, it wasn't a wake up call for me, because I think I had a, I had quite a good head on my
shoulders anyway, partly because mainly because of my mum. But it just reemphasized to me that
at that particular moment, if that individual could have made any, you know, if they could have
made different choices, I think they would have done. And obviously, the choices that they made
were a contributing factor in them losing their life, which is sad in itself, because it also
speaks to a society and a structure that sometimes doesn't give people any choice, it doesn't give
people the opportunity to become socially mobile. And, you know, particularly for a lot of black
and ethnic minority people, that kind of disadvantage is something they experience on
a continual everyday basis. And yes, there are white working class people who also experienced
that as well. But I think coming out of that situation is very, very difficult when there
are mechanisms in society to make, you know, particular groups of people from socially
deprived backgrounds, socially mobile, if that makes sense.
How, as a society, can we connect more Sandro type characters with people who've got
promise and talent, but don't have the experience of the belief that Sandro had in you and
they don't have the experience of somebody saying, you can do something really good,
you can be really successful? How can we replicate your story more in society, if at all?
I think it's difficult. I mean, you can't replace a Sandro, Andre Sandry. He is a one-off,
he is a one-off. But what I would say is it starts with the messages teachers, you know,
you spend more time at school than you do with your family. So you spend five years in school,
you spend eight hours a day in school, eight to 10 hours a day in school. And some of the messages
that teachers, you know, perpetually tell young people, I don't think they realize the impact that
can have on people. That's the only thing that becomes a dominant message because it's the person
you probably interact with the most. You know, most people go home in terms of young children,
may not see their parents because they're out at work when they do see their parents maybe for two
or three hours tops and then they're in bed, you know, spending eight to 10 hours with a teacher.
I think it's about the messages we tell young people and not imposing a deficit way of thinking
on these young people, you know, if they come from a socially deprived background,
that doesn't mean that's what their destiny will be. I think it's about teachers actually.
And, you know, having been a teacher, you know, there are some fantastic teachers who are so
aspirational and really encourage that aspirational drive and acumen in young people. But equally,
there are some teachers who say things that are just the most important things to say to a young
person, you know, you'll end up working in McDonald's. You know, first things first, like,
what would be wrong with working at McDonald's? You know, there's nothing, there's nothing wrong
with that. You'll end up, you know, collecting the bins for a living. It's the kind of language
teachers use. It's kind of language teachers use which can be like stifling, you know, demeaning.
And that is a narrative that kids can hold on to. So I think it's really important that, like,
when you're looking at someone, you may see how they are now, but you don't know where they'll
end up. And I think it's always important to treat people with dignity and respect and to really
encourage, you know, the ability for them to be able to change the fate of their stars, you know.
And I really do believe in that there's an expression that every person's a master of
their own faith. So I do think that. But that is only to the extent that it is encouraged by,
you know, supportive, nurturing people. So, okay, so you're 30, you've raised,
you hit your target, you've raised a million pounds for charity. And then is it back into
more academia then at that point? Yeah, at that point. So, I mean, when I was 30, I had my PhD
examination. So it was kind of a rock and roll, like, for want of a better term, 20s. So
Arnie was diagnosed with a brain tumor in January 2015. January 2015. And at the time,
Debbie, my ex-partner, she was pregnant, you know, it was a difficult situation. It was a job I had at
the time, I needed to keep my job by getting my PhD. And that was like a really, really kind of
telling thing. And I mean, that wasn't the pressure, depression income from that. I mean,
it was just really unfortunate, to be honest. But kind of long story short, I had my, I had a benign
brain tumor, my pituitary gland, and I had it removed three weeks before my PhD examination.
So this was August 2015. And I had this removed, yeah, three weeks before. So my examination was
on the 29th of August, 29th of September 2015. And I can remember a thing in this exam. And there
was a lot riding on this, you know, I'd already done my PhD in pretty quick time, it was two and
a half years. So the average amount of time it takes to do a PhD is like four to five years
part time. And I had done it basically two and a half years. I did it full time, I did it, it was,
I did it in, I was part time, but I didn't full time. Because, you know, I was paying for it myself.
So it was just costing a lot of money. So we need to get done as quick as possible.
And in this exam, I mean, to be quite honest, I'm failing miserably, Nick. I mean, failing
miserably, there's a point in this exam, we're 18 minutes, we're 60 minutes in. And you know,
Sandro sat outside, and I'm thinking if he was here seeing this kind of, to be honest, shitshow,
he would probably be thinking, you know, I don't mind you failing because, you know, you tried your
best and you couldn't do it. And you just couldn't, you know, you couldn't get there. But out of fear,
and I just I was paralyzed by fear. And I don't know what happened. It was like, I don't know,
almost like this out of body experience. And I don't know what happened, but the fear left,
and once the fear left, and I accepted that I could fail. And there was nothing wrong with that,
I tried my best. Again, it comes back to this whole idea of like, you know, enjoying adversity,
something kicked in. And I enjoyed the experience, I enjoyed the experience of being having my back
up against the wall and thinking like, how can I use my temperament? You know, how can I find a
way to navigate or get out of this kind of thorny terrain? How can I get out of this situation? And
that's where you rely on your temperament, and that toughness to find a way out of it. And luckily,
it's something that hadn't really let me down for that point, the best part of 12 years. And it was
something that I could draw on again, because I loved the idea of being in the thick of it, you know,
like being in a battle. And that's the thing, like, when you're in it, you know, what you need is
clarity and stillness of thought, you have to actually be quite cerebral. And, you know,
I was able to thank God, I don't know if I, you know, I'll never know how far I got over the line,
personally speaking, I think I just crept over the line, but it doesn't matter, I did just enough
to get over the line. And that's, and that is actually all that matters. So you got your PhD?
I did. Yeah, congratulations. That's at a certain point in that exam, you thought, no way,
not going to happen. No, I was, I was, you know, all I was thinking about is if I failed consequences
of failure, you know, I would hope and have no job. But I was second child, but I, you know,
Deb's was on maternity leave at the time, there was all these variables that I never thought about.
And rather than just thinking, embrace, let's embrace this, like, let's, you know, let's,
let's, let's, let's, let's embrace this whole experience, you know, it's difficult, but that's
what you love, Jason, that's, you know, that's kind of what, you know, that's, that's where you're at
your best when you're, when you're in a situation where, you know, I need that, that friction, that
friction of like, you know, it's impossible. That's what makes this adaptive. The impossible for me
is always deductive. Here's another question, then can we encourage people or educate people or
train people to better embrace those moments of adversity so that they can go, yeah, this is shit.
Yes, I'm really struggling, but I'm gonna embrace it and make the best out of it. Because that's
clearly you have a talent for doing that. How can, how can people listen into this podcast
kind of set them put their mind in a place where when things are really bad, they
lean in and get the best out of it rather than just run away and collapse and heat.
Yeah, I hear what you're saying. I mean, I think it comes down to perspective. I mean,
I wouldn't want to minimize anyone's experiences with adversity or difficulty. But for me personally,
I often have this conversation with my brother and my daughter. And I don't know if it's something
you can teach someone. I think I do genuinely think sometimes you're just born with that.
And it's a skill that you can exacerbate and it becomes more compounded by the experiences you have.
You know, because I think people deal with adversity in different ways. And I wouldn't want
to suggest that there's one way of dealing with it because it'd be in some ways, it'd be me kind of
gaslighting and neutralizing how people deal with adversity. You know, when I use the word tough,
by the way, I don't mean in this toxic masculine way. I mean, tough as in I was always really good
at digging in. I could dig in, you know, it was it was always about how much I could endure.
And I knew I could endure a lot. Yeah, I think you're right. I think it might not be possible
to teach people it. But maybe if they hear a story like this, you won't teach them. But it
might make people more aware of what might be possible. Yeah, I think a better spin to always
put on on these things is that it's an opportunity to learn and to learn about yourself and how you
respond to certain situations. And I think people don't look at it as an opportunity to learn a lot
of time. And by the way, rightly so. I totally understand that. I think sometimes I like why
this happened to me. You know, I heard a story I think yesterday of a gentleman who was diagnosed
with a rare form of bone cancer at the age of 23. And now he's doing he's kind of cycling like
1000 miles a day or something to raise 50,000 pounds for charity. And he's been told he's been
given a terminal diagnosis. Now he's not 30 yet. He's been given a terminal diagnosis. Now he,
you know, I would love to know how did he accept that? You know, how has he managed to take what
is that's that's worse than adversity, he's going to be facing, he's been told that he's going to
be facing impending death. And he's taken that with as much grace as one could. In fact, he's
decided that he's going to use the remaining time he may have left to help, you know, develop
research, or fund research in that area for people who have particular types of bone cancer.
I just think that that's brilliant. You know, it's that idea of it's how people respond to it,
you know, and there's not a hard and fast way to do it. But I think it's kind of looking at it as
an opportunity to learn about like, learn about yourself. And for me, I've always taken these
things as an opportunity to learn about myself. And the greater the adversity, the more I learned
about myself. And I appreciated it because it was a great lesson. It was always a great lesson for
me. Tell me about when you got your current gig. Was that smooth sailing? I wouldn't say it was
smooth sailing because I mean, I do you suffer a lot of disappointments. But I think it was that
whole idea of when things don't go your way, as my mom always said, take a good grace. And when
things do go, I'm always a good grace. So as I mentioned earlier, I was good at losing. So I knew
how to lose and lose really graciously. And before I actually got that big opportunity at Durham,
when I was 33, I had my brain, I had a second brain tumor, which at 32, which I kind of thought,
Oh, man, like, so they just need to get this clear. When you mentioned before about getting diagnosed
with a brain tumor, then what a period when you got the all clear on one, then you had a period and
then you then you got hold on, you might have another one. Is that right? Yeah, two years apart.
So that was that second one was tough. Because I thought, wow, I remember the doctor actually
saying to me the neurologist just saying, it was just said, you know, sometimes you get dealt a very
bad hand and you don't deserve that Jason, but you know, we'll do everything we can. And at that
point, I think I'd heard that. I think there was a period of five minutes where I went into the
toilet. You know, I cried because I was really disappointed for obvious reasons. And after that
five minutes, I'd accepted it. I'd accepted that this was how it was supposed to be. And we'll find
a way out of it. And I, you know, I didn't I didn't actually tell anyone, the only person who knew was
my GP. And I've never found a way out of it. And obviously, you know, you're applying for jobs,
you know, because I really wanted to know I thought the thing that would cut this story off is,
you know, you know, in my head, you know, 12 years after learning to read and write, you get a PhD.
And I didn't go to an elite institutional Russell Group institution, which is like kind of 26 of the
most elite universities, research intensive universities in the UK. But how cool would it be
to find up at one, you know, the PE teacher that ended up being a sociologist? And so because it's
the idea of the impossible. That's what's, you know, the impossible is what's, as I said, it's
seductive to me. So you apply for these jobs. And, you know, obviously, the higher the stakes, the
bigger the rate of rejection. Yeah. Which is tough to take. But it's all a learning experience. And
each time I was getting closer and closer and closer. And I remember thinking, like, my
opportunity will come. And when I got this gig at Durham, so this would have been April 2019.
I just I just I just knew on that day, like, like, there's a really cool,
my mom's favorite band is Queen. So as you can imagine, as a kid, I listened to Queen a hell of a
lot. And in the song, it's a kind of magic. And there's a line like no mortal man can win this
day. And I just knew that, you know, on that particular day, I wasn't more. I knew that I was
going to be I was going to do something special. And I knew that for whatever reason, the powers I
had on that day were going to get me over the line. You know, I just felt it. And I remember
thinking I remember saying out loud to myself, if someone gets this job over me today, they will
thoroughly deserve it because I genuinely couldn't have done any any better or any more. Yeah. Yeah.
And then I mean, it was the the interview went over the third and the fourth of April. So I
remember having this research presentation on the third, then the actual interview on the fourth. And
yeah, I remember being on train back home thinking I couldn't from Durham think I couldn't have done
any better. And then the day after I was on my way back from Coventry, got a phone call and got
told that, you know, I'd got the gig and it was the biggest sense of relief. There wasn't I wasn't
elated. It was a sense of relief. I'd all the potential and all the effort that Sandra had said
I'd had. It felt like in that one moment, I'd finally realized it, you know, and there were
lots of things I'd done, but that particular thing was so, so impossible. So like, no, none
of us could have predicted it. But like, you know, it was so unlikely that the sense of relief was
like, it was huge. I'd realized the potential that, you know, Sandra said I'd had all these years. And
also a lot of people that time you were beginning to say to me, you know, Jason, you're being
adopted as the next big thing in terms of race and higher education and race and education, you know,
you need to learn one of these gigs needs to do this, you need to do this. And it's kind of like,
listen, it's not something I'm not trying. Yeah, I'm doing my absolute best here. You know, I can't
I'm going up against people that are, you know, in some cases better than me. In some cases,
your face doesn't fit, you know, in terms of being a black person. But I was always confident
that my opportunity would come. And, you know, I just thought on that particular occasion,
I remember thinking like, right, rebel double top me, I think I think the checkout is there. And
on that particular day, it was and it was just amazing. It was an amazing feeling to realize
that potential in some ways, to kind of know that, you know, financially, I knew that I'd
been a position where I could look after my parents, I could look after my friends, I just
knew there were certain things by having that job that I wasn't going to have to worry about anymore.
And and so it turned out. Well, it's a it's an incredible story, something we've not touched on
yet is your faith. What role does does your faith have in your journey?
Yeah, I was gonna say, I mean, it's really funny, Nick. I mean, I've got a tempestuous relationship
with God, to say the least. So, you know, and I remember being told the story of Moses when I was
a child. And to this day, I still don't understand how to make it to promised land. He was he was he
was challenged beyond beyond anything. And, you know, I still don't you know, any question God
wants wasn't allowed into the promised land. And I always thought the injustice of that was ridiculous.
And so a lot of time you kind of think, you know, my mom always says that God only gives you what you
can manage and we can handle. But I think my relationship with my faith is quite a simple one.
And the reason why I say that is because there are lots of crazy things that happen,
one of which, you know, I wouldn't say I miss particular podcasts, but there are some really
crazy things. And, you know, there's a footprints kind of prayer that my mom always kind of used to
read to me, my brothers, and, and still says to me as an adult now, and is this idea that, you know,
if you are walking alone, the things that you have experienced, you wouldn't have been able to get
through if I wasn't here with you. And for all of the things that have happened in my in my life,
personally, it was so unlikely that there is no way I could have done it on my own. And then for
that reason, if there are a million reasons I could I could I could use and a million testimonies I
could use, but for that one reason alone, I do believe there's someone watching over me. And that
is been omnipresent and presided and everything that I've done. And I do believe that to be to
be God and I think people can extract faith in many different ways, you know, and there isn't
one way to observe or to engage with faith. But for me, you know, my belief in God really
stems from the fact that there are many things that have happened to me. And I don't think I
would be here if it wasn't for the fact that there's someone looking over me, you know, I
think that's I think there's too much evidence for me to suggest otherwise either that or I've been
ridiculously lucky, which I think I've been probably quite lucky. But I also think there's
been someone looking over me who has, you know, a greater plan for me, and I wouldn't want to
ram faith down anyone. But I think we all have things that we believe in, you know, I was watching
a documentary on Diego Maradona the other day, and in Argentina is a church of Diego Maradona.
And I found it amazing, you know, they believe Maradona to be their God. And, you know, and I
was like, that's great. That's brilliant. And I think it comes back to the same thing. I think
faith can be embodied in many different forms. I don't think there's any right or wrong way to
observe faith. And I think sometimes we can get drawn into this, these kind of arguments about how
people should observe faith and whatever. But I think it's been able to draw on faith, you know,
as and when they need. Yeah. And for people who draw on it consistently, I think there's no
wrong or right way. And I think it's important that we all learn to recognise that because
sometimes I think we can be quite judgmental in terms of how people engage with their faith and
what people deem to be something that they place their faith in. And I think that judgment isn't
necessary. I don't think it's necessary. Were you taught to be religious by your parents? Did they
say this is the way it is? God is up there. You're down here. Yeah. Was it something that you were
taught from an early age and you didn't question? I would say my parents are deeply religious. I
mean, as religious as you could be. And I was brought up definitely with the Christian faith.
But my mum, to be fair, did teach me to question things because she said that's the only way you'll
learn. And so I don't know if that extended to faith. But she often told me about, you know,
you can have, you know, faith can waver and there's nothing wrong with that, you know.
And actually, it's about how you come back to that faith and people do it in different ways. So,
you know, my mum taught me to kind of question things and to be able to ask God certain questions,
you know, and to be mindful that the answers may not reveal themselves in a deep voice talking to
you in your sleep, but to be through, you know, actions or circumstances or things that happen
where you kind of think how has that happened? And, you know, that may be the opening for some sort
of divine intervention or some sort of divine intervention may have taken place. You need to
realize something that may have seemed insurmountable. So I think, you know, that was important.
You know, my mum never rammed it down my throat. You know, I went to church as a child, but as I got
into my adolescence, you know, it wasn't something that was kind of rammed down my throat, but it was
used as an anchor to guide me in terms of having some sort of moral compass. Got it. Got it.
Wow. I mean, you've had an incredible life. You've managed to achieve some incredible things.
What would you like to achieve in the time that you've got left?
My dream would be to have my own charity, so specifically for carers. So,
I think, you know, I don't want to make this a political broadcast, but like there are,
I think the politics we have in this country has let a lot of people down in society, in many
sections of society, one of them, one particular group being carers. I think carers engage in a
very selfless act of self-dedication to another human being. And in doing so, they miss a lot of
opportunities that are available to them to become socially mobile, advance their life,
increase their life chances in terms of gainful employment, etc., etc. So, for me, my charity,
if it should happen, which I hope it does, would really be focused on providing carers with
opportunities to reintegrate in society because there is a loneliness and an isolatory aspect
to being a carer for someone and find ways to give them opportunities to reintegrate within
society through education, whether that be getting, you know, this particular charity
would give funding for people, you know, access courses, university courses, and really subsidise
a lot of their learning. So, that would kind of be the essence of my charity and then find ways to
provide opportunities for them to gain employment, whether that might be through apprenticeships,
degrees, trades, and that would be my dream really because I think carers,
I think the sacrifice they make and the years they lose, I don't think people recognise the
significance of that. And having worked in care homes and known a lot of people that have been
carers to people and taught students that have been carers to people, that's something that
hits your conscience hard because my mum took 15 years out of work to look after me, you know,
from 25 to 40. And I think if you take the best 15 years out of someone's life at that particular
age, I do think it's consequential on the life they end up having, as opposed to the life they
could have had had they not been in that position in the first place. Well, however difficult it may
be to achieve what you want to achieve, I find it hard to believe that you won't achieve what you
want to achieve, Jason, to be honest, and I'm going to be fascinated to follow your journey.
And I also think that... Do you think that you might become a bit more public-facing
in years to come? It's really funny because obviously I never... I mean, I hate socials,
I'm not on socials. Can I just say I had to track you down by emailing the press office of Durham
University because the way I became aware of you was I heard you talking on Radio 4 and I thought,
oh, this guy's got an interesting story. And what was the first thing I did? Look for you on the
socials. I'm like, what? I couldn't find you. I'm like, how am I going to track this guy down? And
I had to put a bit of work into it and then I figured, yeah, and then I found you. So, yeah,
so that... Well, that's interesting. Yeah, you don't have the socials presence, do you?
And it's really funny because I guess for most people nowadays, they make their name
through that, but none of this has been by design. I really just tried my best at anything that I did.
And obviously the research and the charity stuff is the stuff that I'm known for.
But by default, I've ended up in that public-facing situation, but I guess more and more,
I'll be asked to... Over the last two or three years, I've been asked to do a lot of stuff
and do pieces for BBC, Sky, CNN, stuff like that. So, yeah, I mean, that's never the design. I think
that the mantra is always to try and... Whatever platform you have, try and influence people in a
positive way, remain humble and learn from the best and learn how not to be, learn how to be
and always try and remember how different things could be. In 2013, I was cleaning toilets
as a weekend job at Tukunim Stadium. So anytime I'm sat here doing things as amazing as this and
being in such amazing company with yourself and Mike, all I'm thinking is, it's just madness.
Not that long ago, I was cleaning toilets at Tukunim Stadium. And that's what stays in my mind.
So as long as that stays in my mind, I think I'm all right. Because yeah, it'd be nice. I think being
in public facing is a useless thing when you can't influence people in a positive way. And if I can
influence people in a positive way, and it happens organically, that's great. But what I wouldn't be
doing is forcing the issue for that to happen. Because there's a game you can play to be more
public facing. And I think, for me, that's not the reason why I ever did it. So if it organically
happens, great. But it won't be something that I'll be deliberately choreographing to happen.
Okay. Well, I get that. Well, I've got to say, thank you so much for choosing to do this,
considering that you're not of a mindset to do tons of public facing stuff. But I hope you do
do more public facing stuff in years to come. Because I think there's a lot of people who can
be inspired by your story, who can learn from it. And it can help people. So I hope you do become
a little bit more public facing, possibly in years to come. I've got one final question for you.
The height of your ambition at Attag
was to be able to spell your name was something that you said when I listened to you on Radio 4.
What advice would you give right now to your 18 year old self?
I don't know. I guess it'd be something around the lines of keep dreaming big. And I mean, look,
there's a consequence of dreaming big. I mean, there's many things it's cost me to be quite
honest. Because I think the people around me might not say I'm particularly easy for them to live
with. Not because I'm difficult, but because if I get an idea, it's like, I'm going to go with it.
But there's not a selfishness in me doing it. But there is a bloody mindedness in me doing it,
which can I guess make me difficult to be around. But yeah, it would be like,
it would be believing myself because I think self belief, you know, it's quite rocky again,
like you said, you know, he's on the beach with Adrian and he says like, you know, nothing is
real if you don't believe in who you are. And I think all that all those years I wasted just not
really believing in myself. You know, I think I could have done so much more. Even if I'd believed
in myself in two or three years before I actually did, I think that could have made a massive
difference. So I think the thing I would say to myself is to believe in myself. And and I think
the hardest thing I think when you become successful is to remain humble. And I think
that I haven't changed as a person. And because like, of the people I've had around me,
but more importantly, because you know, I have reference points, you know, that remind me that
17 years ago, things could have been so so very different, you know, so when you know that,
that's important. And I guess I, you know, I couldn't I don't want to sit and pretend like I
could have predicted all of this when I was 18. Because to be honest to you, I did want to get a
job. And I thought if I got a job in a supermarket working one day a week, and I did live in a house
with other adults that may have had particular types of special educational difficulties or needs,
that would be that'd be great. I'd still be integrating with other adults, you know,
because I thought I'd live at home for the rest of my life. So really, everything's a bonus. And I
always say if all ended tomorrow, I've had a great run. So I'm, you know, I really have,
but I've overachieved. The great thing with overachieving is that you can kind of enjoy
everything that happens as a bonus. Amazing. Jason, it's been absolutely wonderful to speak to you
today. Thank you so much for for giving me your time, man. No, Nick, honestly, it's been a blast.
And thank you so much for having me and continue the great work. It's a privilege to be with you.
So thank you. Thanks, man. That's brilliant. I hope to speak to you again before too long, Jason.
No, that's great. All the best, man, with the rest of the journey. Thank you.
