DEVELOPED BY THE UK RESEARCH INTEGRITY OFFICE WITH THE RESEARCH INTEGRITY CONCORDAT
SIGNATORIES GROUP




Liverpool John Moores University annual
statement on research integrity: academic year
2024-2025
Section 1: Key contact information

 Question                                  Response


 1A. Name of organisation                  Liverpool John Moores University


 1B. Type of organisation:

 higher education                          Higher Education Institution
 institution/industry/independent
 research performing
 organisation/other (please state)


 1C. Date statement approved by            Approved the Executive Leadership Team
 governing body (DD/MM/YY)                 on 24 March 2026


 1D. Web address of organisation’s         https://www.ljmu.ac.uk/research/research-
 research integrity page (if applicable)   integrity


                                           Name: Professor Keith George, Pro-Vice
                                           Chancellor (Research and Knowledge
                                           Exchange)
 1E. Named senior member of staff to
 oversee research integrity
                                           Email address:
                                           ResearchIntegrity@LJMU.ac.uk


                                           Name: Professor Keith George, Pro-Vice
                                           Chancellor (Research and Knowledge
 1F. Named member of staff who will        Exchange)
 act as a first point of contact for
 anyone wanting more information on
 matters of research integrity
                                           Email address:
                                           ResearchIntegrity@LJMU.ac.uk

                                                                                       1
DEVELOPED BY THE UK RESEARCH INTEGRITY OFFICE WITH THE RESEARCH INTEGRITY CONCORDAT
SIGNATORIES GROUP




Section 2: Promoting high standards of research integrity and
positive research culture. Description of actions and activities
undertaken
 2A. Description of current systems and culture

 Please describe how the organisation maintains high standards of research
 integrity and promotes positive research culture. It should include information on
 the support provided to researchers to understand standards, values and
 behaviours, such as training, support and guidance for researchers at different
 career stages/ disciplines. You may find it helpful to consider the following broad
 headings:

 •   Policies and systems
 •   Communications and engagement
 •   Culture, development and leadership
 •   Monitoring and reporting

 2.1. Liverpool John Moores University empowers intellectual curiosity and
 creativity in all who conduct research under its auspices. As underlined in the Pro-
 Vice Chancellor’s Statement on Research Integrity, we take great pride in a vibrant,
 empowering culture where staff, students, and collaborators pursue excellent
 research and knowledge exchange activity while being supported to uphold the
 highest standards of research ethics and integrity.

 2.1.1. This report covers the period 1 September 2024 to 31 August 2025.

 2.2. Policies and Systems.

 2.2.1. The Pro-Vice Chancellor (Research and Knowledge Exchange) is the
 University’s senior academic lead for research ethics and integrity matters.

 2.2.2. The Pro-Vice Chancellor (Research and Knowledge Exchange) chairs the
 University Research and Knowledge Exchange Committee, which reports to
 Academic Board. The Committee receives reporting from the University Research
 Ethics Committee, which is chaired by the Head of Research Ethics and
 Governance.

 2.2.3. The University Research Ethics Committee reviews all eligible research and
 knowledge exchange projects from staff and postgraduate research students.
 Undergraduate and taught postgraduate student projects are triaged and reviewed
                                                                                        2
DEVELOPED BY THE UK RESEARCH INTEGRITY OFFICE WITH THE RESEARCH INTEGRITY CONCORDAT
SIGNATORIES GROUP




 by School- or Faculty-level local Research Ethics Committees, chaired by senior
 academic staff within the relevant discipline/s.

 2.2.4. The Head of Research Ethics and Governance is responsible for overseeing
 research ethics and governance resources and processes at the University,
 covering policy implementation, data systems, and University Research Ethics
 Committee. They advise the Pro-Vice Chancellor (Research and Knowledge
 Exchange) on any needs for relevant policy change.

 2.2.5. The Head of Research Excellence and Research Strategy is responsible for
 overseeing research integrity resources and processes at the University, including
 administering the Liverpool John Moores University Policy for Alleged Misconduct
 in Research and Knowledge Exchange and the Liverpool John Moores University
 Statement on Responsible Research Assessment. They advise the Pro-Vice
 Chancellor (Research and Knowledge Exchange) on any needs for relevant policy
 change.

 2.2.6. The Liverpool John Moores University Code of Practice for Research and
 Knowledge Exchange is the overarching policy document establishing strategy and
 intentions for research ethics and research integrity policies and systems. In line
 with the Concordat to Support Research Integrity, it provides the clear direction
 communicated in the specific policies and procedures which ensure research and
 knowledge exchange occur with consistently high standards of ethics and integrity.
 These policies and procedures include:
 a) Liverpool John Moores University Research Ethics and Governance Standard
 Operating Procedures.
 b) Liverpool John Moores University Research Ethics Decision Tool.
 c) Liverpool John Moores University Statement on Open Research.
 d) Liverpool John Moores University Research and Knowledge Exchange Data
 Management Policy.
 e) Liverpool John Moores Human Tissue Operations Manual.

 2.2.7. The Liverpool John Moores University Research Ethics and Governance
 Standard Operating Procedures outline how research ethics and integrity decisions
 are made at the University.

 2.2.8. The Liverpool John Moores University Research Ethics Decision Tool supports
 staff and students to determine whether their proposed activity will require them
 to obtain ethical approval.



                                                                                       3
DEVELOPED BY THE UK RESEARCH INTEGRITY OFFICE WITH THE RESEARCH INTEGRITY CONCORDAT
SIGNATORIES GROUP




 2.2.9. The Liverpool John Moores University Statement on Open Research outlines
 the University’s commitment to Open Research. It encourages all University
 researchers to conduct research in the most open way possible and provides
 practical support to do so.

 2.2.10. The Liverpool John Moores University Research and Knowledge Exchange
 Data Management Policy empowers University researchers by defining key terms,
 procedures, and expectations for Research and Knowledge Exchange Data
 Management.

 2.2.11. The Liverpool John Moores Human Tissue Operations Manual defines the
 University’s obligations under the Human Tissue Act 2004 and sets out the relevant
 framework for decision making and tissue storage.

 2.2.12. All Liverpool John Moores University policy documents include a title page
 which defines the entity responsible for policy implementation, the date of
 approval, the date of next review, and the entity responsible for review.

 2.2.13. All proposed research activities involving animals are assessed and then
 monitored by the Named Animal Welfare and Care Officer. The Named Animal
 Welfare and Care Officer conducts spot checks to ensure activities are being
 conducted appropriately. The Named Animal Welfare and Care office is responsible
 for referring activities to the Liverpool John Moores University Animal Welfare and
 Ethical Review Board.

 2.3. Communications and Engagement.

 2.3.1. Liverpool John Moores University emphasises the importance of internal and
 external communication to ensure research and knowledge exchange activity
 conducted under the auspices of the University are in accordance with the highest
 possible standards of research integrity.

 2.3.2. The Liverpool John Moores University Research Integrity website launched in
 academic year 23-24. It is designed as a first point-of-contact for internal and
 external audiences regarding research integrity at Liverpool John Moores
 University. It contains material on the university’s research integrity ambitions,
 policies and procedures, annual reporting, training resources, and routes for
 contacting the university on research integrity matters.

 2.3.3. The Research and Innovation Services Directorate website contains
 additional information on good practice and training, available to all staff and
                                                                                       4
DEVELOPED BY THE UK RESEARCH INTEGRITY OFFICE WITH THE RESEARCH INTEGRITY CONCORDAT
SIGNATORIES GROUP




 students, assigned to webpages based on relevant service team responsibilities.
 The webpages include:
 a) The Research Ethics and Governance webpage provides details of research
 ethics decision making and standard operating procedures, including portals to
 submit proposals for ethical approval review at School and University level. The
 page also links users to the University’s Researcher Ethics and Governance training
 course.
 b) The Grants, Policy, and Projects webpage supplies guidance on the University’s
 Export Control and Sanctions triage, and links to the Export Control Checklist, the
 Online Goods Checker tool, and to the Higher Education Export Control
 Association’s online training module, for which the University has a use licence.
 c) The Research Excellence team webpage hosts the Liverpool John Moores
 University Open Research Statement and Liverpool John Moores University
 Statement on Responsible Research Assessment.
 d) The Knowledge Exchange and Commercialisation team webpage sets out
 University expectations for Spin-out Best Practice Commitments and offers sources
 of support for commercialisation activities, including governance training to ensure
 the highest standard of ethical conduct throughout the innovation journey.

 2.3.4. The Library Services Open Research team website provides Liverpool John
 Moores University researchers with access to bespoke advice, timetabled training
 events, and established procedure and principles statements:
 a) Basic principles of Open Research and best practice guidelines.
 b) Guidance on Open Access publishing principles.
 c) Guidance to Key Funder Open Access policies, including eligibility and
 compliance requirements.
 d) Institutional Open Access agreements, including eligibility criteria and
 agreement durations.
 e) Key principles of Research Data Management.
 f) Guidance on preparing and using Research Data Management Plans.
 g) Guidance on the responsible use of metrics in evaluating research.
 h) Research staff and students can contact the Open Research team for further
 information: OpenResearch@LJMU.ac.uk.

 2.3.5 The Open Research team launched the ‘Open Data Week’ initiative at the
 University in academic year 23-24, running it annually. The 24-25 Week supplied
 training in open data practices to all staff, researchers, and students. Open Data
 Week is designed to promote interdisciplinary awareness of research integrity
 practices and acknowledges the varying requirements across disciplines and




                                                                                        5
DEVELOPED BY THE UK RESEARCH INTEGRITY OFFICE WITH THE RESEARCH INTEGRITY CONCORDAT
SIGNATORIES GROUP




 promotes best practices in open research. Open Data Week was developed to
 complement Open Research Week, which runs every February commencing 18-19.

 2.3.6. The University has a single point-of-contact inbox for comments, queries and
 suggestions on research integrity matters: ResearchIntegrity@LJMU.ac.uk, which
 operates under the purview of the Pro-Vice Chancellor (Research and Knowledge
 Exchange). This mailbox is presented in the ‘Contact Us’ section of the University’s
 Research Integrity website.

 2.3.7. The University is a subscriber to the United Kingdom Research Integrity
 Office and a member of the United Kingdom Reproducibility Network. Staff are
 encouraged to subscribe to both organisations’ newsletters and to access the
 training sessions and workshops made available from our institutional affiliations.

 2.4. Culture, Development, and Leadership.

 2.4.1. Liverpool John Moores University supports all research staff and students to
 understand the importance of research integrity to ensure full trust and confidence
 in the research process. The University provides training and policies founded on
 the principles of honesty, transparency, accountability, respect, and rigour. All staff
 and students can access any Liverpool John Moores University policy document
 through the University’s Policy Centre.

 2.4.2. All staff and students can access Liverpool John Moores University’s research
 integrity online training materials and links to external guidance through the
 Research Integrity website. The website focuses on asynchronous delivery for
 audience convenience, including an ‘Integrity bitesize’ resource to provide quick
 answers on research integrity and Questionable Research Practices.

 2.4.3. The University Open Research team provides training sessions related to
 research integrity, open research, and research evaluation. All sessions are
 bookable for staff and (where eligible) students through the central UniCal
 platform as a ‘one-stop shop’. Relevant training courses include cross-disciplinary
 sessions covering data management planning, storing and sharing research data
 safety, ethical data sharing, and compliance with research funder and publisher
 policies.

 2.4.4. The Liverpool John Moores University Doctoral Academy provides policies
 related to research degrees in a publicly viewable format, communicating an
 introduction to the principles of research integrity for all research students at the


                                                                                           6
DEVELOPED BY THE UK RESEARCH INTEGRITY OFFICE WITH THE RESEARCH INTEGRITY CONCORDAT
SIGNATORIES GROUP




 start of their journey and outlining how those principles will shape the doctoral
 journey.

 2.4.5. The Policy for the Supervision of Research Degrees clarifies that it is the
 specific responsibility of the lead supervisor to ensure that the PGR is aware of
 regulations and policies of the university, and of the need to conduct their research
 according to ethical principles, and of the implications of research misconduct and
 plagiarism.

 2.4.6. Liverpool John Moores University provides specific researcher development
 training programmes for career profiles with dedicated research integrity and
 ethics components: the Doctoral Academy Researcher Development Programme
 and the ACTivator Programme for staff early in their research career.

 2.4.7. In 24-25, the Vice Chancellor’s Awards for Excellence in Research and
 Knowledge Exchange included the category: Excellence in Open Research. The
 award category is in its second year. It celebrates individuals or research teams
 who have demonstrated a commitment to Open Research practices. It rewards and
 celebrates innovative practices that enhance transparency, inclusivity, collegiality,
 reproducibility, and efficiency in open research practices.

 2.5. Data Management Advocacy.

 2.5.1. Liverpool John Moores University is committed to upholding high standards
 of research integrity in data management by embedding the FAIR (Findable,
 Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable) principles into research data management
 processes.
 2.5.2. The Library’s Research Data Management Specialist periodically assesses the
 Liverpool John Moores University Research Data Repository for compliance with
 these principles, ensuring that all datasets meet the necessary standards for
 discoverability, accessibility, and long-term usability.
 2.5.3. Based on the assessment, the Library’s Open Research team has expanded
 the Repository with new requirements:
 a) All data sets must have a new ‘fields of research’ field.
 b) the Dublin Core metadata standards must be present as a minimum standard for
 ensuring findable metadata.
 2.5.4. Liverpool John Moores University mandates that all data sets have a
 persistent identifier. These identifiers, including DOIs, ensure interoperability and
 ensure transparency and compliance with funder and institutional requirements.


                                                                                         7
DEVELOPED BY THE UK RESEARCH INTEGRITY OFFICE WITH THE RESEARCH INTEGRITY CONCORDAT
SIGNATORIES GROUP




 2.5.5. All datasets must be associated with a README file, given in a standard
 format, which provides access instructions for all Repository users.
 2.5.6. To ensure equitable researcher access to FAIR principles support, Liverpool
 John Moores University uses established pathways for promoting data
 management best practices through targeted advocacy. The Research Data
 Management Specialist works with Research Groups, Centres, and Institutes,
 Faculty committees, and Research Support staff teams to highlight and implement
 emergent best practice in FAIR principles, Open Access, and responsible data
 stewardship. All activities are recorded in an annual FAIR data report.
 2.6. Monitoring and Reporting.
 2.6.1. The Pro-Vice Chancellor (Research and Knowledge Exchange) is responsible
 for monitoring research integrity at Liverpool John Moores University.
 2.6.2. The Pro-Vice Chancellor (Research and Knowledge Exchange) tasks the
 University Research and Knowledge Exchange Committee to be the forum for
 periodic review of research integrity policies, processes, and progress at Liverpool
 John Moores University.
 2.6.3. The University Research and Knowledge Exchange Committee can request
 reporting from its subordinate Committees and Groups, including the Faculty
 Research and Knowledge Exchange Committees and the University Research Ethics
 Committee.
 2.6.4. The School-level Research Ethics Committees supply annual reporting to the
 University Research Ethics Committee outlining the number and scope of decisions
 made and escalated.

 2.6.5. The Library reviews the efficacy of research data management training
 annually. The Research Data Management Specialist monitors and evaluates the
 effect of Liverpool John Moores University research data management initiatives,
 combining narrative assessment and training session feedback with quantitative
 metrics, accessibility rates of open datasets, and repository access and download
 rates.

 2.6.6. The University Research and Knowledge Exchange Committee receives an
 annual report on anonymised lessons learned from the activities conducted in the
 delivery of the Liverpool John Moores University Statement on Responsible
 Research Assessment and the Policy for Alleged Misconduct in Research and
 Knowledge Exchange. The report is compiled by the Head of Research Excellence
 and Research Strategy and the Head of Research Ethics. The report does not cover
 actions under the auspices of the Staff Disciplinary Procedure or the Academic
 Misconduct Policy.

                                                                                        8
DEVELOPED BY THE UK RESEARCH INTEGRITY OFFICE WITH THE RESEARCH INTEGRITY CONCORDAT
SIGNATORIES GROUP




 2B. Changes and developments during the period under review

 Please provide an update on any changes made during the period, such as new
 initiatives, training, developments, also ongoing changes that are still underway.
 Drawing on Commitment 3 of the Concordat, please note any new or revised
 policies, practices and procedures to support researchers; training on research
 ethics and research integrity; training and mentoring opportunities to support the
 development of researchers’ skills throughout their careers.

 2.7. Developments in Academic Year 2024-2025 include:

 2.7.1. Developments related to policies, principles, and procedures:
 (a) Liverpool John Moores University participated in the Research Excellence
 Framework 2029 People Culture and Environment pilot exercise, with four Units of
 Assessment and an Institutional submission each mapping ‘responsibility’ policies,
 principles, and procedures within their remits. The submissions were made in
 March 2025 for return in the 2025-2026 academic year.
 (b) The University Research and Knowledge Exchange Committee reviewed and
 updated the Liverpool John Moores University Research and Knowledge Exchange
 Data Management Policy in May 2025. The Policy will next be reviewed in May
 2027. The Policy governs research data storage and publication. It promotes the
 principles set out in the Concordat on Open Research Data and the UKRI common
 Principles on Data, and is aligned with FAIR (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable,
 Reusable) data principles.
 (c)The Research Ethics and Governance team has reviewed and updated all
 Standard Operating Procedures and best practice guidance on the intranet
 SharePoint site in an exercise running November 2024 to February 2025.
 (d) We have continued the development of the Liverpool John Moores Policy on
 Generative Artificial Intelligence (Large Language Models) and Research Ethics and
 Integrity, consulting with academic and professional stakeholder groups.

 2.7.2. Developments related to communications and training:
 (a) Creation and launch of the website https://www.ljmu.ac.uk/research/research-
 integrity as a one-stop-shop for research integrity advice, positions, and training at
 LJMU, consolidating support previously spread throughout the university’s web
 estate.
 (b) The University became a signatory of the Coalition for Advancing Research
 Assessment (CoARA) and launched its associated Action Plan for 2025-2026. To
 develop a CoARA action plan focused on the University’s developmental journey,

                                                                                          9
DEVELOPED BY THE UK RESEARCH INTEGRITY OFFICE WITH THE RESEARCH INTEGRITY CONCORDAT
SIGNATORIES GROUP




 staff from Research and Innovation Services and Library Services benchmarked
 LJMU responsible research assessment provision against sector-leading
 institutions.
 (c) The University relaunched its series of UK Reproducibility Network
 ‘ReproducibiliTea’ journal club meetings, based within the School of Psychology
 and open to all staff and postgraduate research students.
 (d) In March 2025, researchers in the School of Biological and Environmental
 Sciences (BES) and staff in the Library Open Research team collaborated to publish
 the discipline-specific ‘Open Research in BES’ guidebook with targeted advice to
 enhance the transparency and robustness of research findings by encouraging
 open access publishing, preprints, open peer review, open educational resources,
 and open research data sharing. The guide is published online.
 (e) The Library Open Research team published the ‘Liverpool John Moores
 University Open Research Guide’ in May 2025. The guidebook expanded the BES
 version with University-wide guidance on open access publishing, data sharing,
 reproducible workflows, and public engagement toward enhancing transparency,
 collaboration, and research impact. The Guide is available in print and online.

 2.7.3. Developments related to practices include:
 (a) Design and launch of the Innovation, Development, Evaluation and Acceleration
 to Scale (I.D.E.A.S.) Programme, which provides institution-wide support for all
 LJMU staff and postgraduate researchers to develop innovation and
 commercialisation opportunities. The four-week programme emphasises high
 standards of ethical conduct and includes learning material on responsible
 innovation in internal and external product development.
 (b) The University conducted the Culture, Employment and Development of
 Academic Researchers Survey (CEDARS) in July 2025 with targeted questions on
 research integrity expectations and awareness for permanent staff and fixed-term
 research staff. The proportion of each group indicating awareness of the Concordat
 to Support Research Integrity exceeded the University’s internal target. A greater
 proportion of fixed-term researchers reported feeling able to raise concerns about
 research practice than permanent staff, indicating both progress made and areas
 for further development.
 (c) The University’s research animal facilities were audited in October 2024 by the
 Home Office Animals in Science Regulation Unit. The audit resulted in a satisfactory
 outcome with no formal advisories.




 2C. Reflections on progress and plans for future developments


                                                                                      10
DEVELOPED BY THE UK RESEARCH INTEGRITY OFFICE WITH THE RESEARCH INTEGRITY CONCORDAT
SIGNATORIES GROUP




 This should include a reflection on the previous year’s activity including a review of
 progress and impact of initiatives if known relating to activities referenced in the
 previous year’s statement. Note any issues that have hindered progress, e.g.
 resourcing or other issues.

 2.8. Reflections include:

 2.8.1. Reflections on progress since 2023-2024:
 (a) We have developed and launched a dedicated website for Research Integrity
 resources and training at Liverpool John Moores University.
 (b) We are continuing the development of the Liverpool John Moores Policy on
 Generative Artificial Intelligence (Large Language Models) and Research Ethics and
 Integrity for subsequent adoption.
 (c) We are developing and will publish a Research Publications Policy focused on
 supporting research being made openly available, on retaining key rights for both
 authors and the university and assessing individual research outputs on their
 intrinsic merit and potential extra-academic impact rather than their venue of
 publication.
 (d) We have supported the Faculty Research and Knowledge Exchange Committees
 to begin planning for Faculty-specific research integrity and research data
 management plans following the 2025 merger of five faculties into two.

 2.8.2. Developments planned for reporting in 2025-2026 include:
 (a) Updating the Liverpool John Moores University guidance on Research Centre
 and Institute formation and reporting to include support for good research
 integrity practices.
 (b) The University Research and Knowledge Exchange Committee to receive the
 2025-2026 annual report on the implementation of the Liverpool John Moores
 University Responsible Research Assessment Statement.
 (c) Implement the Liverpool John Moores University Action Plan for the Coalition
 for Advancing Research Assessment 2025-2026.
 (d) Continue development of the Liverpool John Moores Policy on Generative
 Artificial Intelligence (Large Language Models) and Research Ethics and Integrity for
 subsequent adoption.
 (e) Reviewing the resources provided through the Liverpool John Moores
 University research integrity website.
 (f) Reviewing the potential to clarify internal University mechanisms for when and
 how to engage Data Protection Officers in research design processes.
 (g) The University’s two Faculties will each review the provision of expert peer
 review of proposals for externally funded research, including clarifying pathways
 and expectations for peer review activities.
 (h) The Pro-Vice Chancellor (Research and Knowledge Exchange) will review ways
                                                                                      11
DEVELOPED BY THE UK RESEARCH INTEGRITY OFFICE WITH THE RESEARCH INTEGRITY CONCORDAT
SIGNATORIES GROUP




 how Liverpool John Moores University could benefit from additional staff resource
 to support research integrity practice and policy development.
 (i) Reviewing the Liverpool John Moores University Code of Practice for Research
 and Knowledge Exchange on its bi-annual review schedule.




                                                                                      12
DEVELOPED BY THE UK RESEARCH INTEGRITY OFFICE WITH THE RESEARCH INTEGRITY CONCORDAT
SIGNATORIES GROUP




Section 3: Addressing research misconduct
 3A. Statement on processes that the organisation has in place for dealing with
 allegations of misconduct

 Please provide:

 • a brief summary of relevant organisation policies/ processes (e.g. research
   misconduct procedure, whistle-blowing policy, bullying/harassment policy;
   appointment of a third party to act as confidential liaison for persons wishing to
   raise concerns) and brief information on the periodic review of research
   misconduct processes (e.g. date of last review; any major changes during the
   period under review; date when processes will next be reviewed).

 • information on how the organisation creates and embeds a research
   environment in which all staff, researchers and students feel comfortable to
   report instances of misconduct (e.g. code of practice for research, whistle-
   blowing, research misconduct procedure, informal liaison process, website
   signposting for reporting systems, training, mentoring, reflection and evaluation
   of policies, practices and procedures).

 • anonymised key lessons learned from any investigations into allegations of
   misconduct which either identified opportunities for improvements in the
   organisation’s investigation procedure and/or related policies / processes/
   culture or which showed that they were working well.

 3.1. Summary of relevant policies and processes.

 3.1.1. The Liverpool John Moores University Policy for Alleged Misconduct in
 Research and Knowledge Exchange contains the procedure for addressing
 allegations of research misconduct. The Policy is derived from the Liverpool John
 Moores University Code of Practice for Research and Knowledge Exchange. Both
 documents reflect UKRIO principles and the University’s obligations to
 transparency, timeliness, robustness, and fairness as under Commitment 4 of the
 Concordat to Support Research Integrity.

 3.1.2. The Policy defines misconduct in research and knowledge exchange as
 fabrication, falsification, plagiarism, or deception in proposing, carrying out or
 reporting results of research and deliberate, dangerous or negligent deviations
 from accepted practice in carrying out research or knowledge exchange activity. It
 includes failure to follow established protocols if this failure results in unreasonable

                                                                                       13
DEVELOPED BY THE UK RESEARCH INTEGRITY OFFICE WITH THE RESEARCH INTEGRITY CONCORDAT
SIGNATORIES GROUP




 risk or harm to humans, other vertebrates or the environment, failure to adhere to
 approved ethical practices where applicable, and facilitating of misconduct in
 research and knowledge exchange by collusion in, or concealment of, such actions
 by others. It acknowledges misconduct in research and knowledge exchange will
 not normally include honest and reasonable error, or honest and reasonable
 differences of interpretation or judgement in the collection, evaluation or reporting
 of research results.

 3.1.3. The process functions with a three-phase model, where allegations are
 reviewed and investigated by staff with appropriate job roles and experience and
 have no associated conflict of interest. In full, the process has a preliminary
 screening phase, an investigation phase, and an outcome phase. The outcome
 phase is supplied by transparent policies for taking relevant action where
 appropriate. The policies are the Staff Disciplinary Procedure for allegations against
 staff and the Academic Misconduct Policy for Postgraduate Research Students.

 3.1.4. As described in the ‘Contact Us’ section of the Liverpool John Moores
 University Research Integrity website, staff, students, and external parties seeking
 advice on the Policy for Alleged Misconduct in Research and Knowledge Exchange
 can contact the Pro-Vice Chancellor (Research and Knowledge Exchange), Professor
 Keith George, through the email account ResearchIntegrity@LJMU.ac.uk. Students
 can also contact the Student Governance team through the email account
 StudentGovernance@LJMU.ac.uk.

 3.1.5. The Policy for Alleged Misconduct in Research and Knowledge Exchange was
 instituted in 2015. It is reviewed every three years or when there are pertinent
 changes to legislative frameworks. Its next scheduled review date is September
 2026.

 3.2. Creating and embedding a research environment in which individuals feel
 comfortable to report instances of misconduct.

 3.2.1. Liverpool John Moores University seeks continuously to enable individuals,
 including staff students, external stakeholders, and collaborators to be able to
 report instances of research misconduct. The University has instituted policies to
 support individuals who may need assistance in a situation of potential misconduct.
 A-F are held within the University’s online Policy Centre, accessible by all staff and
 students. G is held within the University’s Research Ethics and Governance
 SharePoint page, accessible by all staff and students.



                                                                                      14
DEVELOPED BY THE UK RESEARCH INTEGRITY OFFICE WITH THE RESEARCH INTEGRITY CONCORDAT
SIGNATORIES GROUP




         a) Policy for Alleged Misconduct in Research and Knowledge Exchange
         b) Staff Disciplinary Procedure
         c) Academic Misconduct Policy
         d) Whistleblowing Policy
         e) Dignity at Work Policy
         f) Anti-Bribery and Corruption Policy and Procedures
         g) Liverpool John Moores University Research Ethics and Governance
         Standard Operating Procedure.

 3.2.2. The University’s Research Integrity website has a page hosting publicly
 viewable copies of relevant policies:

         a) Code of Practice for Research and Knowledge Exchange
         b) Whistleblowing Policy
         c) Policy for Alleged Misconduct in Research and Knowledge Exchange

 3.2.3. The University’s Research Ethics and Governance Standard Operating
 Procedure provides contact details for individuals to speak to UKRIO’s Advisory
 Service for independent, expert and confidential advice on understanding and
 addressing poor practice and misconduct.

 3.2.4. The University’s Research Ethics and Governance Standard Operating
 Procedure is linked to staff at the top of the Research Ethics and Governance
 webpage, in turn linked from the main Research and Innovation Services
 directorate webpage. The University’s Policy Centre is linked from the ‘Useful Links’
 section at the top of the University’s main Staff Home page.

 3.2.5. The University empowers individuals to report instances of misconduct:
 (a) Individuals who are considering reporting a concern can access confidential
 professional services advice. This advice is provided by the Head of Research
 Excellence and Research Strategy and the Head of Research Ethics, who can be
 contacted through the mailbox ResearchIntegrity@LJMU.ac.uk.
 (b) Faculty Associate Deans – Research and Knowledge Exchange can provide
 confidential, faculty-specific advice for those considering reporting a concern.
 (c) The Concordat to Support the Career Development of Researchers Steering
 Group lead a ‘Research Staff Association’ forum to discuss fixed-term research staff
 perspectives on improvements to the University research environment, including
 potential barrier issues related to reporting misconduct.
 (d) Individuals who wish to report an issue with the research environment as it
 enables them to feel comfortable to report instances of misconduct can do so by


                                                                                      15
DEVELOPED BY THE UK RESEARCH INTEGRITY OFFICE WITH THE RESEARCH INTEGRITY CONCORDAT
SIGNATORIES GROUP




 first contacting the Pro-Vice Chancellor for Research and Knowledge Exchange,
 Professor Keith George, through the mailbox ResearchIntegrity@LJMU.ac.uk.

 3.3. Lessons learned.

 3.3.1 We learn lessons through periodic review of the Policy for Alleged
 Misconduct in Research and Knowledge Exchange on a three-year cycle and
 through extraordinary reviews following pertinent changes to legislative
 frameworks.

 3.3.2. We have learned the following lessons in the review period, which we will
 take into the next modification of the Policy for Alleged Misconduct in Research
 and Knowledge Exchange:
 (a) We have made valuable use of strong relationships between teams whose work
 covers matters of academic misconduct and matters of misconduct in research and
 knowledge exchange, including peer-led review of process mechanisms.
 (b) The University Research and Knowledge Exchange Committee will review and
 propose any extraordinary changes to be made to the Policy for Alleged
 Misconduct in Research and Knowledge Exchange for implementation before the
 next UKRIO Research Integrity reporting window.



 3B. Information on investigations of research misconduct that have been
 undertaken

 Please complete the table on the number of formal investigations completed
 during the period under review (including investigations which completed during
 this period but started in a previous academic year). Information from ongoing
 investigations should not be submitted.

 An organisation’s procedure may include an initial, preliminary, or screening stage
 to determine whether a formal investigation needs to be completed. These
 allegations should be included in the first column but only those that proceeded
 past this stage, to formal investigations, should be included in the second column.

                                            Number of allegations
                          Number of                        Number
                                                                              Number
                          allegations      Number of       upheld in
 Type of allegation                                                        upheld in full
                         reported to         formal        part after
                                                                            after formal
                              the        investigations     formal
                                                                           investigation
                         organisation                    investigation
                                                                                       16
DEVELOPED BY THE UK RESEARCH INTEGRITY OFFICE WITH THE RESEARCH INTEGRITY CONCORDAT
SIGNATORIES GROUP




 Fabrication                  0               0                 0                0
 Falsification                0               0                 0                0
 Plagiarism                   1               1                 0                1
 Failure to meet              0               0                 0                0
 legal, ethical and
 professional
 obligations
 Misrepresentation            1               1                 0                0
 (eg data;
 involvement;
 interests;
 qualification;
 and/or
 publication
 history)
 Improper dealing             0               0                 0                0
 with allegations of
 misconduct
 Multiple areas of            0               0                 0                0
 concern (when
 received in a
 single allegation)
 Other*                       0               0                 0                0
 Total:                       2               2                 0                1
 *If you listed any allegations under the ‘Other’ category, please give a brief, high-
 level summary of their type here. Do not give any identifying or confidential
 information when responding.
 [Please insert response if applicable]




                                                                                         17
