   Turkish Online Journal of Distance Education-TOJDE April 2011 ISSN 1302-6488 Volume: 12 Number: 2 Article 2




   AN INQUIRY INTO BENEFITS OF REFLECTIVE PRACTICE
           IN OPEN AND DISTANCE LEARNING
                                                                 Muhammad ATHAR HUSSAIN
                                                        PhD Scholar, Department of Education,
                                       International Islamic University, Islamabad, PAKISTAN

                                                                          Dr. Azhar MEHMOOD
                                                           Lecturer, Department of Education
                                       International Islamic University, Islamabad, PAKISTAN

                                                                             Munazza SULTANA
                                                   PhD Scholar, Department of Islamic studies
                                           Allama Iqbal Open University, Islamabad, PAKISTAN

ABSTRACT

Innovations in learning with conscious thinking result in conceptual and effective
learning. New strategies and techniques of learning aim at bringing about change in
behavior that might help in solving problems of the individual at local and global
level. This paper inquires into benefits of Reflective Practice in Open and Distance
Learning in Pakistan. A questionnaire was administered among 40 students doing
masters in Education, autumn 2009, at Allama Iqbal Open University Islamabad.

Collected data were analyzed by calculating percentage and Mean scores of each
item. An interview was conducted to validate the quantitative data. Findings showed
that Reflective Practice helped learner in solving their learning problems and learners
were able to cope with problems with their conscious effort. The respondents were
agreed that consultation with friends and discussion with senior colleagues benefited
them in solving problems involved in their learning. The respondents acceded that
counseling for selection of subjects and institution, their past experiences and self-
reports were useful in teaching-learning process and solving their learning problems.
The respondents were of the opinion that reflective practice helps in solving learning
problems and in bringing improvement in their behavior.

The findings also indicated that lack of counseling, time and resources caused
problems in becoming reflective and committed person. Keeping the findings in view,
it is recommended that reflective practice might be promoted among students with
the help of counselors, teachers, senior students, books and journals. Extensive
counseling be provided to students at postgraduate level and curricula should be
made innovative.

Keywords: Reflective Practice, Counseling, Behavioral change, Distance Education.

INTRODUCTION

Teaching aims at bringing behavioral change through reflection and counseling. It
desires to produce dynamic, reflective and inspirational individuals who believe in
guiding and counseling the ignored segments of the society. According to Sharma,
R.A (1993, p.22) “teaching is a social and professional activity. It is a process of
development. Teaching is a system of action which induces learning through
interpersonal relationship.”



                                                                                                                 51
Teaching and learning process requires special knowledge, skills and experiences.
The knowledge, skill and experiences are prerequisite for the professional growth of
an individual.

When one deliberately thinks about his performance once in his practice, it will give
birth to the improvement of the whole teaching and learning process. According to
Karen et.al (1993, p .19):

       “Reflective practice is viewed as a means by which practitioners can develop a
                    great level of self awareness about the nature and impact of their
               performance, an awareness that creates opportunities for professional
                                                                             growth.”

Reflective practice creates problems solving competency, critical, constructive and
original thinking among the learners .It also frees teaching from impulsive routine
behavior and makes teaching intentional and deliberate. Reflective practice is
perhaps best understood as an approach which promotes autonomous learning that
aims to develop students' understanding and critical thinking skills. Techniques such
as self and peer assessment, problem-based learning, personal development planning
and group work can all be used to support a reflective approach.

Schön (1987) has given reflective practice currency in recent years, using and
applying a basic principle of reflecting on experience to improve action and
professional practice. However, this is not a new or original idea; it has been
developed by education such as Dewey and Lewin and can be traced back to the work
of Socrates and a form of learning through questioning and feedback. It forces us to
question what it is that we know and how we come to know it. More currently, it is
suggested that learning to learn, or the development of learning power, is getting
better at knowing when, how and what to do when you don't know what to do
(Claxton, 1999). This lack of certainty forces the individual to examine the basis on
which s/he believes something to be true.
It also helps students to understand that learning is individual, and that only they can
make the connections to existing knowledge such that they make sense of law for
themselves.
Reflective practice is driven by questions, dialogue, and stories Reflective practice is
fundamentally structured around inquiry. We tend to recognize the importance of
allocating time to reflection when we can see it as a means for gaining visibility on
 a problem or question we need to answer. To gain visibility, we examine experiences
that are relevant to this problem or question.

The most powerful “technologies” for examining experience are stories (narrative
accounts of experience) and dialogue (building thinking about experience out loud).
Journaling is similar to dialogue in the case of individual reflection. Stories and
dialogue can be effective technologies for the reflective process because they provide
cognitively complex and culturally potent systems for conveying the way we think
about, feel about, and make connections in experience (Clarke, 1995).

The term ‘Reflective Practicum’ is for the educational setting, or environment: “A
practicum is a setting designed for the task of learning a practice”.

This is where students learn by doing , with the help of coaching. The practicum is
‘reflective’ in two senses: “it is intended to help students become proficient in a kind
of reflection-in-action; and, when it works well, it involves a dialogue of coach and
student that takes the form of reciprocal reflection-in-action” (Schön D,1987).
 Reflective practice can be a beneficial process in teacher professional development,
both for pre-service and in-service teachers.


                                                                                     52
As defined by Schon, reflective practice involves thoughtfully considering one's own
experiences in applying knowledge to practice while being coached by professionals
in the discipline (Schon, 1996). After the concept of reflective practice was introduced
by Schon, many schools, colleges, and departments of education began designing
teacher education and professional development programs based on this concept.

More recently, Boud and Walker (1998) also noted shortcomings in the way SCDEs
were applying Schon's concept of reflective practice to teacher education. They took
issue with what they considered to be a "checklist" or "reflection on demand"
mentality, reflection processes with no link to conceptual frameworks, a failure to
encourage students to challenge teaching practices, and a need for personal
disclosure that was beyond the capacity of some young teachers. Boud and Walker
suggest that these weaknesses can be addressed when the teacher-coaches create an
environment of trust and build a context for reflection unique to every learning
situation.

Reflective practice is used at both the pre-service and in-service levels of teaching.
Coaching and peer involvement are two aspects of reflective practice seen most often
at the pre-service level. In a 1993 study of how student teachers develop the skills
necessary for reflective teaching during their field experiences, Ojanen explores the
role of the teacher educator as coach. Teacher educators can most effectively coach
student teachers in reflective practice by using students' personal histories, dialogue
journals, and small and large-group discussions about their experiences to help
students reflect upon and improve their practices.

Kettle and Sellars (1996) studied the development of third- year teaching students.
They analyzed the students' reflective writings and interviewed them extensively
about their reflective practices. They found that the use of peer reflective groups
encouraged student teachers to challenge existing theories and their own
preconceived views of teaching while modeling for them a collaborative style of
professional development that would be useful throughout their teaching careers.
Formal system of education has a wide range of opportunities and pathways to
introduce and practice reflective practice but on the other hand, non-formal system,
distance and open learning system faces challenges to fully meet the requirements of
developing reflective practice among learners of open and distance system of
education. In Pakistan, Allama Iqbal Open University provides education to a large
number of students from matriculation to PhD programs through open and distance
teaching and learning. The university employs non-formal method of correspondence,
radio and television broadcasts, special textbooks and reading materials prepared on
self-learning basis, part-time teachers (tutors) engaged nearest to the student's
residences. And a system of study centers for applied training is spread throughout
Pakistan.

In distance education, Serving as a coach or mentor to peers is another form of
reflective practice for in-service teachers. Uzat (1998) presents coaching as a realistic
and systematic approach to ongoing teacher improvement through focused reflection
on teaching methods. Uzat also relates the concept of coaching to self-efficacy:
Teachers' beliefs that they affect students' lives as well as the school motivate them
intrinsically to grow.

BENEFITS OF REFLECTION IN PRACTICE

The primary benefit of reflective practice for teachers is a deeper understanding of
their own teaching style and ultimately, greater effectiveness as a teacher. Other
specific benefits noted in current literature include the validation of a teacher's
ideals, beneficial challenges to tradition, the recognition of teaching as artistry, and
respect for diversity in applying theory to classroom practice. Freidus (1997)

                                                                                      53
describes a case study of one teacher/graduate student struggling to make sense of
her beliefs and practices about what constitutes good teaching. Her initial pedagogy
for teaching was based on the traditions and practices of direct teaching. Her
traditional socialization into teaching made it difficult for her to understand that her
views of good teaching were being challenged in her practice. But the opportunity for
exploration through reflective portfolio work enabled her to acknowledge and
validate what she was learning.

RESEARCH QUESTIONS

The purpose of this study was to inquire into benefits of reflective practice at
postgraduate level in open and distance learning. More specifically the study was
designed to answer the following research questions:

   1. Is Reflective Practice significant in Open and distance learning?
   2. What are students’ perceptions towards reflective practice?
   3. Does reflective practice help solve their learning problems?

REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE

Various studies on reflective practice and counseling show that they are essential to
develop a balanced personality. In teaching-learning process, students are in direct
contact with their teachers and they depend upon teachers for social, emotional and
intellectual development and adjustment through guidance and counseling.
 Davis, J. R. (1997, p.2)

            “Teaching involves a teacher and a student interacting over a subject in a
                                                                             setting.”

Reflective practice is not conducive to teaching situations if it is not perceived
accurately (Boud & Walker, 1998). Rogers (1995, p.11) defines innovation in social
perspective, which is as follows:

         “An idea, practice or object that is perceived as new by an individual or other
             unit of adoption, it matters little, so for as human behavior is concerned,
           whether or not an idea is objectively new as measured by the laps of time,
             since its first use or discovery. The perceived newness of the idea for the
               individual determines his or her relation to it. If the idea seems new to
                                                           individual, it is an innovation.”

Despite these criticisms reflective practice has become the major model for
continuing professional development in higher education (Bleakley, 1999). Reflective
practice generates a form of knowledge that lead to creativity and critical thinking
(Sue Clegg, 2000). Guidance and counseling services are provided to learners to solve
their problems, to face their difficulties and to learn effectively. The success of
counseling process mostly depends upon the efficiency of the counselor, so counselor
should be a guidance-minded committed and skilled person. Counselor is the nerve
center of the guidance program. He should have a well-balanced personality, a broad
outlook, an understanding attitude and a genuine interest in helping students.
According to Orbach (2003, p.11):

                       Counselors are seen-alw ays to som e ex tent-as authority figures,
           k now ledgably, w ise, reliable and able to tak e on the full force of the clients
               fear and pain, as w ell as burden of their intim ate secrets. This w ork is of
              m ature counsellors, already qualified and in general counselling practice.

Karen, F.Etal (1993, p.19) Writes:

                                                                                          54
                 “Reflective practice, w hile often confused w ith reflection, is neither a
                  solitary nor a relax ed m editative process. To the contrary, reflective
                 practice is a challenging, dem anding, and often trying process that is
                                               m ost successful as a collaborative effort”.

The origin of reflective practice comes from Dewey’s work on reflective practice, in
this context John Dewey (1933,p.6) maintains:“Active, persistent, and careful
consideration of any belief or supposed form of knowledge in the light of the grounds
that support it, and the further conclusions to which it tends…”

Bartlett (1990, p.204) states:

         “Improvement of teaching may be achieved through reflection. Reflection is
        more than “thinking” and focuses on the day to day classroom teaching of the
          individual teacher as well the institutional structures in which teachers and
                                                                        students work”.

The problem solving counselling is very useful in solving the problems of the learners
i.e. dealing with system breakdowns, improving concentration and reading speeds,
anxiety and clarifying motivation etc.

According to Prasad (2000, p.97) “the purpose of individual counselling is to facilitate
wise choice of the sort on which the person’s later development depends”.
Counselling is a teaching-learning process for the client. It is a relationship between
a professionally trained competent counselor and the individual who wants to learn
about himself. Various goals for counselling have been established over the years.

In both formal and non-formal system of education, Reflective practice involves
thinking about and learning from your own practice and from the practices of others,
so as to gain new perspectives on the dilemmas and contradictions inherent in your
educational situation, improve judgment and increase the probability of taking
informed action when situations are complex unique and uncertain. In distance
education, students and tutors are linked through multi-media sessions, Radio and
Television programs, correspondence material, tutorial meetings and group
workshops.

METHODOLOGY

The nature of the study was descriptive. Survey method was adopted to collect data
from the respondents. The sample of the study was 40 prospective teachers doing
masters of Arts in Education enrolled in semester autumn 2009 at Allama Iqbal Open
University Islamabad.

Allama Iqbal Open University A questionnaire of 12 items was developed keeping the
related literature in view.

The questionnaire was modified and refined with experts’ opinion that established
content and face validity of the instrument. Only 35 questionnaires were properly
answered, among the rest, some had missing items and some were incorrectly filled
in. The questionnaire was designed on five point rating scale from strongly agree to
strongly disagree.

Data Analysis
The questionnaire was distributed personally and the responses came from 35
students out of 40 that was 85.5 percent of the total delivered questionnaires.


                                                                                        55
Sr.   Statements           SA      A       UNC      DA      SDA    %      Mean
No                                                                        Score
1.    Counseling is         19     13        3       0       --
      necessary for a     54.4%   37%     0.09%    0.0%            91.4    4.5
      student to
      address his
      problems in
      learning.
2.    Students should       19     10       1        5       --
      consult their       54.2%   27%     .01%      14%            81.2    4.2
      seniors about
      difficult issues
      in learning.
3.    Students can
      overcome their       18      14       0         3      --    92      4.5
      problems in         52%     40%              0.09%
      learning
      through
      counseling by
      the teachers.
4.    Past                 12      22        1       --      --
      experiences         34%     63%     0.02%                    97      4.3
      help in
      resolving
      students
      problems.
5.    Awareness of a
      student through      18      13        2        2
      counseling          52%     37%     0.057%   0.057%    --    89      2.0
      about the
      nature and
      impact of his
      performance is
      very important
6.    Fellow
      students’            14       19      8        9       7
      feedback and        40%     54.2%    23%      26%     20%    94.2    3.4
      observation
      help in
      resolving
      students’
      learning
      problems.
7.    Counseling           20      14       --       1       --
      enables the         57%     40%              .02%            97      3.4
      students
      enhance their
      learning in
      future.
8.    It is necessary
      for students to      8       12       7        7        1
      frequently          23%     34%      20%      20%     .01%   57      3.5
      interact with
      teachers for
      counseling and
      guidance.
9.    Counseling           5       16       6        6       2
      helps in            14%     46%      17%      17%     8%     60      3.5
      promoting
      personal
      contact with
      teachers.
10.   Reflective
      Practice helps       13      19       1        2
      teachers keep       37%     54%      3%       8%       --    91      4.2
      an eye on
      students
      learning
      activities in the
      classroom.



                                                                                 56
  11.   Reflective
        practice helps      14     12         3         4        2
        Students reflect   40%    34%        9%        11%      8%    74            3.9
        their values and
        assumptions for
        bringing a
        change.
  12    Reflective
        practice helps      14     19         1         1        --   94            4.3
        students           40%    54%        3%        3%
        criticize
        themselves for
        improvement in
        learning.


DISCUSSION

Data analysis shows that the respondents took high interest in manifesting their
attitude and perceptions towards counseling and the reflective practice. Almost all
the students think that counseling and reflective practice help them in their learning
at postgraduate level. Data indicate that 91.4% respondents were agreed that
reflective practice was necessary for a student to cope with various psycho-academic
problems.

The students come with different backgrounds and need counseling for proper
adjustment. 82.8% respondents were agreed that the students need to consult their
seniors about difficult issues in learning.

97% responses show that reflective practice in the classroom helps students
overcome their learning problems. Past experiences that manifest the reflection of
reflective practice help in resolving students’ learning problems as respondents were
favorable to this practice.

89% responses indicate that students think it very important to get awareness
through counseling about the nature and of their performance. As supported by the
data counseling helps enhance students learning in future and it is necessary for
students to interact with teacher for counseling and guidance.

94.2% respondents perceived that fellow students feedback and observation is
helpful in resolving students’ problems in learning. Data on reflective practice show
that the respondents find it helpful in improving learning and bringing positive
behavioral change. The teacher would better watch the students’ activities in the
classroom through reflective practice.

74% respondents were agreed that reflective practice helps the students in reflecting
their values and assumptions for bringing a change and 94% responses accede that
reflective practice is helpful in improving their learning by criticizing themselves.

CONCLUSIONS

From data analysis and discussion following conclusions are drawn:


               Majority of students agreed that students need counseling and
                consulting their seniors to resolve their problems in learning
               Majority of students conformed that past experiences help them
                learning problems.
               Most of students agreed that awareness of the students through
                counseling about the nature and impact of his performance is very
                important.

                                                                                          57
             Majority of students agreed that fellow students’ feedback and
              observation help them in resolving their difficulties in learning.
             Almost all the students were of the view that reflective practice
              enables a student to enhance his/her learning in future.
             Majority of students concurred that reflective practice helps teacher
              keep an eye on students’ learning activities in the classroom.
             Most of the students acceded that reflective practice helps students
              reflect their values and assumptions for bringing positive change.
             Majority of students agreed reflective practice helps students criticize
              themselves for improvement in learning.

Following recommendations are given for further studies:

             Content material on reflective practice and Counseling may be
              incorporated in the syllabus to enhance efficiency of open and distance
              learning.
             Teachers and students may be provided training on reflective practice
              counseling for better teaching and learning process.
             Reflective Practice may be promoted through teaching-learning
              methods and content activities, and by incorporating innovation in
              curriculum.

BIODATA and CONTACT ADDRESSES of AUTHORS

                 Muhammad ATHAR HUSSAIN is pursuing his doctoral degree in
                Education from International Islamic University Islamabad. He has
                done his master in Education as well as in English literature from
                Punjab University Lahore. His several research papers have been
                published in various national and international journals. Mr. Hussain
                has participated in a number of national and international academic
                conferences that sets him a diligent professional and ardent
researcher. His areas of interest include Learning Environments, ICTs, Distance
Learning, EFL, curriculum studies and research methods.

Muhammad ATHAR HUSSAIN
PhD Scholar, Department of Education,
International Islamic University, Islamabad, PAKISTAN
Phone: +92-300-7151178
Email: athar_iiu@yahoo.com


              Dr. Azhar MAHMOOD did M.sc (Psychology) and M.Ed from university
              of Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan. He obtained PhD degree in Education
              from National University of Modern Languages, Islamabad. He is
              supervising research work at the International Islamic University,
              Islamabad and teaching at Master, Mphil and Ph.D levels. His areas of
              interest are Educational Psychology, Early Childhood, Guidance and
              Counseling, Research Methods and Statistics. He has presented
number of research papers at national and international education conferences


Dr. Azhar MEHMOOD
Lecturer, Department of Education
International Islamic University, Islamabad, PAKISTAN
092-51-9019407
Email: azhar.mahmood62@yahoo.com


                                                                                     58
Munazza SULTANA is doing her doctorate on western enlightenment and its impact on
cotemporary Islamic society. She has been lecturer in English at Govt Commerce
College for five years. She has done her master in English literature, Islamic Studies
and Political Science from Punjab University Lahore.

Munazza SULTANA
PhD Scholar, Department of Islamic studies
Allama Iqbal Open University, Islamabad, PAKISTAN
Tel No: +92-300-7151178
E-mail: munazza_aiou@yahoo.com

REFERENCES

Bartlett (1990). Teacher developm ent through reflective teaching . In Richards,
J. C., Accessed 2 February 2005. Teacher Education. Cambridge:
University Press, PP. 202-214.

Bleakley, A. (1999). From Reflective Practice to Holistic Reflexivity, Studies in
Higher Education, 24, pp. 315–330.

Boud, D. & Walker, D. (1998) Promoting reflection in professional courses: the
challenge of context, Studies in Higher Education, 23(2), 191–206.

Clegg, Sue. (2000). 'Knowing through reflective practice in higher education',
Educational Action Research, 8:3, 451-469

Davis, J. R. (1997). Better Teaching, M ore Learning . (Phoenix. American Council on
Education/oryx Press Series on Higher Education.

Dewy, J. (1933). How w e think , New York: D. C. Heath.

Karen, F. Osterman, R., & Kott. K. (1993). Reflective P ractice for Educators,
I m proving Schooling Through it P rofessional Developm ent , California
Crown Press, IMC. Sage Publication Company Newberg.

Kochhar, S. K. (1991) Guidance and Counselling in Colleges and Universities.
New Delhi, Sterling Publisher Private Limited.

Koshy, J. S. (2004) Guidance and Counselling, New Delhi: Dominant Publishers
and Distributors.

McIntosh, C. (Ed.) (2005). Lifelong Learning & Higher Education . UNESCO/COL

Orbach, A. (2003) Counselling Older Clients. London: SAGE Publications.

Prasad, V. S. (2000) Dr. B. R. Ambedkar Open Universities, India in Reddy, V.V.
and Manjulika (eds), The w orld of Open and Distance Learning Viva Books New Delhi,
India.

Rogers, E. M. (1995). Diffusion of innovations (4 th ed ). New York, NY: The Free
Press

Sharma, R. A. (1993). Advanced Educational Technology , Merut, Loyal Book Depot.

Schön, D. (1987). Educating the Reflective P ractitioner . Jossey-Bass: San Francisco



                                                                                        59
