New perspectives to improve
 fairness and equity in PGR
     assessment criteria
     Equity, Diversity and Inclusion in Postgraduate Research
               Friday 3 November 2023, 11.15-12.15

Dr Paulina Rodriguez Anaiz, Margaret James, Danielle Watkis, University of Oxford,
                  Tanne Heathershaw, University of Cambridge
                   Lauren Russell, Nottingham Trent University
                  Dr Benjamin Ajibade, Northumbria University
       Dr Bukola Oyinloye, University of York and Professor Kathryn Arnold
What is the purpose of a PhD?
Selecting for equity in
 doctoral admissions
               Bukola Oyinloye
                Kathryn Arnold
     UKCGE Conference on EDI in PG Research
          Friday, November 03, 2023
What is YCEDE?

A collaboration between five universities in Yorkshire, 12
UKRI funded Doctoral Training partnerships and Centres
for Doctoral Training plus a number of external partners
dedicated to equity at doctoral level.

Central to YCEDE is the question of access to doctoral
study for graduates from Black, Asian and Minority
Ethnic backgrounds.

Funded by OfS, Research England plus partners
YCEDE objectives

1.   Widen opportunities to ensure equity of access to and participation in research.

2.   Change institutional practices and culture to reduce inequality in offer rates.

3.   Ensure experience for PGRs of Colour by developing institutions in which they feel a valued part of the
     wider scholarly community.

4.   Provide evidence base for interventions to share widely across the HE sector and beyond.
YCEDE WS2: PGR recruitment and selection for E&D

1.   Document selection processes and practices, including criteria employed and the role of individual
     selectors

2.   Identify any outlier programmes which exhibit already very positive offer and enrolment rates for
     underrepresented minoritised ethnic applicants

3.   Analyse successful and unsuccessful applications by students from different ethnicities to identify any
     salient features

4.   Cascade results and reforms across the consortium and beyond, including the creation of a training
     workshop programme for staff at partner institutions and DTPs/CDTs
Anglo-American partnership
      Some existing data: Institutional selectivity




Institutional location of students (UK-domiciled only) by level, 2018/19
Some existing data: Institutional distributions




Mission group location of first-degree graduates from selected ethnicities, 2012/13 –
2016/17 (UK-domiciled graduates with ‘good’ degree only)
Key points from existing data on PhD admissions

●   UK graduates from minoritised backgrounds underrepresented in PGR

●   There is a PhD ‘offer gap’

●   Doing the same thing will lead to the same outcome
Study of selectors’ perspectives of PhD candidates

●   Mixed methods study with multiple objectives
      ○   Interviews to explore criteria specifically around participants’ conceptions of ideal and
          successful students (Sciences, A&H, SS)
●   Findings – themes
      ○   Beyond technical competence
            ■   Cognitive ‘technical skills’ important, but overwhelming valuing of ‘not just technically
                competence’ but of diverse personal attributes and motivation
      ○   ‘You miss ‘em when they’re gone’
            ■   Valuing of participation in research communities within and outside institution;
                acknowledgement of influence of students’ personal life contexts.
      ○   Ideal attributes typically discussed in relation to students’ experiences, success attributes in
          relation to thesis completion
Implications

●   Integrating equity into selection consistent with supervisors’ most valued attributes, i.e., attributes
    which pose considerably less equity challenges than those presently explicitly selected for
      ○   Non-cognitive characteristics do not typically feature explicitly in processes but are said to
          feature implicitly in practices

●   Need to foster and support environments in which more holistic selection processes (Kent &
    McCarthy, 2016) feature more prominently
Mapping existing initiatives – DTPs/CDTs

●   Promising initiatives at the [pre]application, shortlisting, interviewing and offer stages, as well as ring
    fenced funding
●   Changes attributed to
      ○   equity/diversity mindset
      ○   committed people and leadership
      ○   openness to change, and the iterative process / challenging conversations it may entail
●   Challenges
      ○   data and system consistency
      ○   legality – positive action, not positive discrimination
      ○   limits to anonymity, e.g., applicant compliance; recognition through research centre names,
          etc.
Thank You
References

●   Kent, J. D., & Mccarthy, M. T. (2016). Holistic review in graduate admissions. Council of Graduate Schools.
    https://cgsnet.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/01/CGS_HolisticReview_final_web.pdf

●   Williams, P., Bath, S., Arday, J., & Lewis, C. (2019). The broken pipeline: Barriers to Black PhD students accessing
    Research Council funding. Leading Routes.
     Close the Gap
    Fair Admissions in Postgraduate Research


UKCGE Workshop: New perspectives to improve
 fairness and equity in PGR assessment criteria


       Margaret James, University of Oxford
    Tanne Heathershaw, University of Cambridge
Close the Gap aims to transform doctoral student selection at Oxford and Cambridge to
develop a socially and epistemically just and inclusive environment for world-leading research

Oxford and Cambridge are analysing formal and informal graduate admissions cultures, systems
and practices, and developing and testing new disciplinary-specific, race-literate, fair selection
processes that are designed to bring about meaningful change in doctoral candidate election
systems. We are working with our partners: Blueprint for All ,The Careers Research and Advisory
Centre (CRAC) Ltd., Leading Routes, and Rare.

Offer Gap: Applicants from Black British, British
Bangladeshi and British Pakistani backgrounds have
historically been around half as likely to receive offers
to study as their white counterparts.

Close the Gap aims to understand the formal and
informal processes and practices underlying
postgraduate admissions, with the goal of reducing
and closing this gap.


                     This work is supported by the Office or Students and Research England under the ‘Improving Black,
                     Asian and minority ethnic students’ access to postgraduate research projects’ funding stream.
Project Method ‘Map and Test’
What have we learned?
Doctoral admissions are a complex process
• Different understandings of the purposes and outcomes of doctoral education may lead to
   different admissions criteria being used or weighted differently.
• There are tensions in the admissions criteria (such as between merit and diversity).

Offer rate gap has no single root cause
• Bias can enter and become entrenched in admissions systems and dynamics, which may work
   against the desire for greater diversity and equity.

To reshape the system, we need to map and understand its complexity:
• Equity-minded holistic approach
• Cross cutting (over range of admissions processes)
Focus on assessment criteria

• At the heart of the doctoral admission process
           All departments use sets of criteria (quantified or qualitative) to assess
            applications
           Place different levels of importance on:
              - the ‘person’ (e.g. in STEM and medical sciences) or
              - the ‘project’ (e.g. in social sciences and humanities).
• Biases can emerge where selection criteria are unclear
           May allow decisions motivated by a range of different values or agendas
            linked with assessors’ own career goals or academic aims
• Rigid criteria, rigidly applied, may reject marginalized candidates
           May result in inequitable processes of PGR admission, disadvantaging
            applicants from a range of backgrounds
Guidelines

• Engage staff in discussions to promote better understanding of criteria and
  how they shape admission decisions
           Understanding of academic potential and merit vary across disciplines,
            departments and individual assessor (contested)
• Frame discussions within wider University EDI policies and Public Sector
  Equality Duty
• Annual review – refining criteria is an on-going process
• s
       Applying criteria
1.     To what extent can the criteria be applied objectively?

     • s
2.     What training do assessors need to understand the purpose and meaning of the criteria, and how to apply them?




       Communicating criteria to students
1.     How are the assessment criteria communicated to applicants? Are they communicated transparently? Do applicants know how
       they are to be assessed?
             e.g., detailed list of criteria on university website
Equity in Doctoral Education
through Partnership and Innovation
Lauren Russell
Nottingham Trent University
The EDEPI Programme
 RE and OfS funded, one of 13 projects created to tackle inequalities that create
  barriers to access and participation in postgraduate research
 Collaboration between Nottingham Trent University, Sheffield Hallam University
  and Liverpool John Moores University
 Delivery partners: UKCGE, AdvanceHE, GRIT Breakthrough Programmes, NHS
 Launched February 2022
 Initiatives target recruitment, admissions and transition
Work-based partnership approach to
postgraduate researcher recruitment
Aims to challenge closed recruitment practices that create barriers to access

Partnership with NHS trusts across Nottingham, Sheffield and Liverpool

Need for improved understanding and practice in areas that impact racially minoritised groups

Pre-doctoral outreach programme to provide information and support

Fee waivers and ring-fenced CPD time

Model that can be replicated across HEIs – doesn’t need to have a healthcare focus
Pre-doctoral outreach programme
Series of workshops to provide information to potential candidates on what a PhD
entails, and how to effectively prepare for application
•   Workshop 1: PhD Myth Busting – Is it right for me?
•   Workshop 2: Building your team and research idea
•   Workshop 3: Preparing for application
Drop-in sessions are provided for the applicants between workshops 2 and 3 to
provide additional support in identifying supervisory teams

**Session on pre-doctoral outreach programme available at 15:25
Reforming admissions practice
Graduate Admissions Process Survey Report
The survey aimed to:
 target staff involved in PGR admissions to understand better the practices that may
  have led to the existing admissions gap;
 find examples of practice that support and enable inclusion at doctoral level; and
 highlight priority areas for improvement.

Overview
• 253 / 46 universities represented
• Ten barriers to PGR admissions identified
• Practical recommendations split into four key themes (pre-application, data gaps,
  supervisors as gatekeepers & fair process)
Barriers
 Admissions decisions weighted heavily on pre-
  application period which is unstructured.
 Lack of diversity in supervisory community.
 Reliance on master’s degree and previous awarding
  institution.
 Data is not usually collected on doctoral enquiries and
  unsuccessful applications, making leaks in the pipeline
  hard to identify.
 Support for finding a supervisor and developing a
  research proposal is less available than information on
  standard admissions processes but more valuable to
  applicants from under-represented groups.
 Decision-making is weighted significantly in favour of the
  supervisor.
Recommendations
 Consider how the pre-application period can be made
  more structured, open, and transparent.
 Review existing pre-application support for fit with
  applicant needs and known inequalities related to social
  and cultural capital.
 Explore what training and information you and/or other
  supervisors in your university need, to enable them to
  engage fully with doctoral enquirers and applicants
 Review assessment criteria, where used, and their
  relative weighting, bearing in mind that systemic
  inequalities at undergraduate and postgraduate taught
  levels have created attainment and access gaps for
  some applicants from racially minoritised groups.
 Explore whether your university PGR admissions data
  are accessible to all staff involved in PGR recruitment
  and admissions and at the right level of granularity for
  their role.
Creating a more inclusive research
culture
 Bespoke workshops co-created with GRIT Breakthrough Programmes and
  AdvanceHE
 Staff workshops to enable organisational and behavioural change
 PGR workshops focus on shifting limiting beliefs, addressing isolation and
  providing safe spaces – holistic development
 Funding competitions open to PGR and staff to trial small-scale
  interventions across academic schools
Connect with us…
   @EDEPI_

   EDEPI@ntu.ac.uk

   https://www.linkedin.com/
   in/edepi/
  UKCGE Workshop: New perspectives to improve fairness and
             equity in PGR assessment criteria




Dr Benjamin Ajibade                             Pro Vikki Boliver
 Interim Institutional Lead                        Admission Lead
  Northumbria University
UKCGE Workshop: New perspectives to improve
fairness and equity in PGR assessment criteria




 Focus    Focus on ‘home’ students
  on

  Bid     Bid developed by: Professor Jason Arday



Project   Project sponsor: PVC EDI Dr Shaid Mahmood



Project   Project manager: Gareth Lawson
                                                Key questions:
                                                • How ethnically diverse are the
                                                  home (UK-domiciled) PGR
                                                  populations in the universities of
                    Admissions: To make           the North East?
Introductions    admissions more equitable,
                  review policies, pilot new
                                                • Are there differential rates of
                                                  application to PGR programmes; if
                                                  so, how can barriers to application
                processes, to increase access     be removed?
                    for students of colour      • Are there differential rates of
                                                  admission given application; if so,
                                                  how can admission rates be made
                                                  equitable?
Pro:NE Logic Model - Admission
              Data from Focus
              group - Admission
  All participants have not engaged in professional help to apply

Online reading / university website / information on scholarship / Google




                         Friend / Peers / Supervisor
                                                         Detailed timeline /
   Information about         Transparency on funding
                                                       application status – for
admission criteria / marks         availability
                                                          better planning




How to improve your profile / CV for better chance of admission
                                                      Data from Focus group exercise
                                                           Barrier to Admission
What do you think are the key barriers for UK-                  What was your experience of the
                                                                application process like?
based students of colour to gain access to PGR                  • The process was gruelling and stressful.
studies?                                                        • All participants have not engaged in
                                                                  professional help to apply other than
• Lack of student motivation/confidence / family                  reference to online reading / university
                                                                  website / information on scholarship /
•   Funding issue                                                 Google, Friend / Peers / Supervisor
                                                                • How to write a good proposal / personal
•   Lack of job opportunities, career advancement                 statement, secure a supervisor and more
                                                                  clarity about the overall application
•   Mature student (left university life and rejoin               process and requirement for ATAS
                                                                  certificate
    after some time)
•   Perception on preference (white vs minority
    ethnic,male vs female)
•   Discrimination of admission process (should be
    equally distributed, merit-based)
•   Insufficient advice / support for admission to
    PGR
•   Lack of role models
•   Socio-economic pressure (need to provide for
    family sooner)
                                               Racially minoritised PGR applicants less likely to be
                                                                  offered a place




Percentage of PGR applicants offered a place



                                                      No data
INITIATIVES
 Explore whether lower acceptance
rates to PGR programmes at the five                                                    Development of high-quality digital
   universities of the North East for        Institutional investment in high-         materials to improve the visibility of
  British non-White ethnic minority              quality advertising of PGR             current PGR students and current
  applicants as compared to White           opportunities, benefits, and how to            academic staff from racially
British applicants are associated with     apply, targeted at racially minoritised     minoritised groups on the university
     systematic differences in the                         people                         website, in digital marketing
 application materials submitted by                                                      materials, and on social media
          these two groups.



                      Development of a set of materials for       Recruitment of current home PGRs
                        use by prospective supervisors to          from racially minoritised groups to
                          provide structured support to          provide additional advice and support
                       prospective PGRs and co-develop a          to prospective PGRs preparing PGR
                                 PGR application                               applications
    IDENTIFYING AND REMOVING BARRIERS
 Make PGR admissions criteria and processes more racially equitable. Applicants from racially minoritised
  backgrounds are likely to be affected by the following
                                                                       • Ineligible for PGR study
                                                                       Considered a weaker candidate for PGR
       Less likely to hold a first or upper second class degree
                                                                       study
                                                                        Limited or no access to insider
       Less likely to have graduated from a higher-tariff university      information about PGR opportunities and
                                                                          application requirements/processes
                                                                        May find it difficult to identify a suitable
       Less likely to receive a funded PhD scholarship                    supervisor from a racially minoritised
                                                                          background
                                                                       • Prospective supervisors may be less
       May want/need to have someone on the supervisory team who
       is also from a racially minoritised background                      likely to respond positively to PGR
                                                                           enquiries from racially minoritised
       Racial bias (conscious or unconscious) on the part of               applicants
       prospective supervisors, admissions selectors, and PhD
       scholarship funding panel members
                                                                       • PGR admissions/funding selectors may
                                                                           make biased decisions
          RESEARCH DESIGN FOR AN ANALYSIS OF SAMPLE PGR
                           APPLICATION

                                             Applications will be sampled      For each institution, the sample
                                           from the most recent year(s) for     will include 3 applications that
   Sample 48 applications,                 which admissions decisions have        meet each of the following
 giving an overall sample size             already been recorded (starting    criteria with respect to applicant
       of 240 applications                   with 2021/22, then previous        ethnicity, sex, broad academic
                                             years as needed to meet the      discipline, and whether or not an
                                                  sampling criteria).                   offer was made.

  For each sampled applicant, we will
   retrieve the following application        Application materials for
   materials for analysis: Applicant’s                                             Previous education,
     completed institution-specific        each institution will be coded
                                                                              qualifications and experience
application form, Applicant’s curriculum     using a pre-agreed set of
vitae, Applicant’s research proposal (or                                        and evidence of relevant
                                            deductive codes, same data
    equivalent), Applicant’s personal                                           professional experience
     statement (or equivalent) and                will be analysed
         Applicant’s references.
        Assessing the potential of applicants
             from diverse backgrounds
Review the profiles shared.
What attributes do you think the applicant could have that would demonstrate
their research potential for the course they have applied for?
(e.g. communication skills, resilience, planning).
How could these attributes be equitably assessed throughout the applicant
review process? (e.g. equal weighting for academic experience and
professional experience...)
Thank you - keep in touch..
closethegap.ox.ac.uk

Equity in Doctoral Education through Partnership and
Innovation (EDEPI) | Nottingham Trent University

Home - (pronortheast.org.uk)

Home - Yorkshire Consortium for Equity in Doctoral
Education (ycede.ac.uk)
