                          February 2026
                           Newsletter
    Hello! Welcome to our February newsletter. In
       this month of love and acceptance we
     explore some fantastic ways of self care in
    our wellbeing Wednesday section, as well as
                         Intro.
    hearing about Louise's   fascinating interview
         with the NIHR about the necessity of
         neurodivergent representation and
     accessibility within research. Have a lovely
                      month <3


          What’s been going on?
                     NIHR Interview
                    Written by Louise          Click here
                                               to see the
Hi, my name is Louise, and I am the
                                               NIHR post
  public co-applicant for ORIGIN. I
      lead the young people’s
 involvement on ORIGIN and am a
young person with lived experience
myself. I am particularly interested
  in ensuring that neurodivergent
people are included in research as
  equal partners and that we shift
  power through lived experience
            involvement.
        I believe this also requires making research
            accessible to neurodivergent people,
       including how it is designed, communicated
        and carried out. Recently, I was interviewed
          by the NIHR, sharing my experience as a
           neurodivergent person in research and
           reflected on why both accessibility and
          sharing power are essential for inclusive
                           research.



      You can read more about it here:
Neurodiversity in research - Be Part of Research




What have our Work Packages
        been up to?

 Throughout the programme, people aged
  16-24 are working as peer researchers or
    co-designers, and have shared their
   experiences through our Work Package
                  updates.
              Work Package 1 (Youth Voice)

  WP1 involves giving people aged 16-24 from diverse
 backgrounds the opportunity to share their stories and
 experiences from their perspective. These experiences
  are feeding into designing an online arts and culture
             intervention for mental health.

   Writing a paper analysing the results of interviews with
   young people about their mental health experiences.

Work Package 2 (Adjustments for Autistic Young People)

   WP2 involves giving autistic people aged 16-24 the
 opportunity to share their stories and experiences from
 their perspective. It is similar to WP1 but focuses on how
  an online arts and culture intervention could be made
           useful for autistic people specifically.

   Further analysing the findings from interviews in order
    to include them in the research paper exploring the
            results of both Work Package 1 and 2.

            Work Package 3 (Realist Review)

      WP3 involves reviewing the existing research to
  investigate the effectiveness of online arts and culture
for anxiety and depression in people aged 16-24. This will
      feed into designing the online arts and culture
               intervention for mental health.

   Drafting an academic publication to inform the online
         arts and culture platform for mental health.
            Work Package 4 (Co-Design)

WP4 involves co-designing an online arts and culture
intervention for mental health in people aged 16-24.

  Discussing how to implement the feedback on stories
                   from young people.
    Creating a group for further story development to
  preapre the stories for the final online arts and culture
      platform by implementing the young people’s
                         feedback.

   Work Package 5 (Randomised Controlled Trial)
 WP5 involves designing and running a trial to test the
effectiveness of the online arts and culture platform to
                  help mental health.

 Submitting preprint papers ahead of the trial later this
                year to help prepare.

         Work Package 6 (Economic Review)

WP6 involves considering how cost effective the online
             arts and culture platform is.
  Getting closer to finishing the coding that reviews the
    cost effectiveness of the online arts and culture
               platform for mental health.
    Preparing to write up the findings of the coding.
          Wellbeing Wednesday
  Take some time for yourself with our wellbeing
 space, created by Ammaarah. ORIGIN is all about
helping our mental health, so our Newsletter is too!


     This week’s well-being
Wednesday is Self-Love Bingo.
Let’s keep things light, realistic
and kind. Instead of aiming for
picture-perfect self-care, let’s
try Self-Love Bingo - a playful
  way to notice all the small
 moments of care throughout
           the week.




                    First, let us create our own bingo card.
                   Grab a piece of paper and create a 3x3
                    table with 9 squares. Fill each square
                        with a self-care act; this can be
                    anything from completing a daily task
                      to absolutely nothing. You can also
                    include something like watching your
                   favourite show or getting a sweet treat.
                      Take a look at an example I made!
                        Feel free to use any of my ideas
                        or browse the internet (there are
Examples of self-care:
                           endless ideas!). Remember,
    Listening to your
                         well-being doesn’t have to be
     favourite song
                         big, productive, or declarative;
        Saying no
                            sometimes it’s quiet and
    Chug a glass of
                            ordinary. This activity is a
          water
                        reminder that small actions still
  No screen for an hour
                        count, and that rest, boundaries,
         Stretch
                         and being gentle with yourself
   Wear your favourite
                             are valid forms of care.
          outfit!
               Come meet different people
Meet the team working in the ORIGIN project!
                    Natalie Louise Bisal (She/her)
                    Role: Postdoctoral researcher
                    What drew you to ORIGIN?: With both
                    an academic and personal interest in
                    the field of mental health and creative
                    arts-based approaches, ORIGIN is a
                    very exciting project to be a part of.


   With its youth-led       We have recently submitted
 approach and focus       our 30-month milestone report
on understanding the       for ORIGIN which captured the
    experiences and        vast work carried out over the
    needs of diverse         last 2.5 years; from the rich
  young people (who       qualitative interviews of diverse
       are often            young people to the creative
 underrepresented in      stories developed for the WoB-
this area), the project    R intervention, all while seeing
 is addressing critical    the youth involvement across
    problems using               the work packages.
innovative methods.



It is a privilege to be working alongside such a dedicated
and passionate group of young people, researchers and
   cultural partners towards a shared goal of improving
       youth mental health through arts and culture.
  What is your favourite food?:
    Freshly baked almond and
 chocolate croissant and cup of
                tea
  What is a song you have on a
               loop?:
What is your perfect weekend?:
Hiking in the countryside or along
  the coast with my dogs (if the
    sun is shining even better)



                 Thank you for reading!

    February 17th is Random Acts of Kindness Day - a
   reminder to celebrate the small, every day ways we
       can look out for ourselves and each other.

  If you’re looking for ideas, check out the Mental Health
   Foundation’s 50 random acts of kindness you can do
         today, or try Ammaarah’s self-love bingo!


                See you next month,
                The Newsletter Team
     @chimes.collaborative           origin@psych.ox.ac.uk

         Has someone kindly forwarded this to you?
                 Click here to subscribe
