Pragmatic White Allyship for Higher
Education Popular Music Academics
Jason Huxtable

Place of publication: Publisher, year of publication
ISBN number (HB/PB) (13-digit ISBN without any hyphens or spaces)


Jason Huxtable
Leeds Arts University
jason.huxtable@leeds-art.ac.uk

Abstract
The world watched the killing of George Floyd from a position of covid induced captivation.
The succeeding global protests and Black Lives Matter movement justly prompted us all to
consider our own complicity with the modes of systemic racism which have normalised anti-
Black thought and action. The Wonkhe@Home: Black Lives Matter event (July 2020) sought to
share pragmatic advice for ‘taking action to tackle racism across HE’, aware of the
responsibility for the Higher Education sector to acknowledge its own role in consecrating
racist forms of knowledge. This ‘statement’ translates session outcomes for Popular Music
Educators (PME), provoking the ethical imperative to reflect upon individual situational praxis’
towards White Allyship action. Through consideration of PME’s typical fields of agency,
suggestions are made towards development of anti-racist learning cultures within Popular
Music Higher Education.

KEYWORDS: Higher Education, anti-racism, White allyship, praxis



“Why now?”
“Why now” provoked Paulette Williams. “Why Now” are, previously quiet, White
voices signaling the discourse-markers of Anti-Racism? This was one of the most
penetrative moments of the Wonkhe@Home: Black Lives Matter event in July 2020.
This session sought to provide opportunities for Higher Education (HE) leaders,




IASPM Journal vol.x no.x (201x)
Journal of the International Association for the Study of Popular Music
ISSN 2079-3871 | DOI 10.5429/2079-3871(201x)xxxxxx | www.iaspmjournal.net
2                                                                            Jason Huxtable


administrators and academics to share pragmatic advice for ‘taking action to tackle
racism across HE’ (Wonkhe 2020)

    Paulette spoke directly to me. “Why now” had I taken the time to attend this event?
What were my motives? Her skepticism of this latest wave of White allyship spoke to a
continued experience of potentially well-meaning but, ultimately, hollow White ‘slack-
tivism’; performative virtue signaling vying for peer approval, fashion conscious of the
need to be seen and heard. This was a challenging question which caught attention in
session reporting (McVitty 2020). Paulette’s provocation required action. Not aloof
‘discussion’, safely cocooned within the (White) ivory tower of academia, but action,
pragmatically situated in the here and now.

   “Why Now?”. 2020 beheld us in witness of George Floyd’s murder from a position
of stillness and attention. The visceral injustice of police brutality played to a captive
audience held still by the Covid-19 pandemic. This was not only a killing made by racist
police but by a racist society, complicit in promoting the conditions for toxic racism to
fester, grow and unleash.

   The rise of racist thought and action had been gathering pace over the last few
years. The visibility and power of far-right racism had reached its apex of
‘normalisation’ in Donald Trump’s presidency. In Europe, increases in hate-crimes and
racially motivated abuse overflowed with increased frequency and aggression. As
statues of colonists were toppled on the streets of the UK, Black British citizens, the
‘Windrush Generation’, were deported, echoing the ‘hostile environment’ rhetoric of
the UK government. Weekly killings in major UK cities provided an unrelenting,
numbing news reel of Black death. These events, exacerbated by Covid-19, revealed
the intensifying symptomatic responses to society’s terminal illness of systemic racism.

   Covid has been destructive, deadly and devastating but also, hopeful. This time of
isolation and reflection has focused global attention on modes of systemic
discrimination which conspire to reinforce cultural cruelties. The ever-increasing
inequalities idealised through faux meritocratic, ‘common-sense’, neoliberalist, health
over wealth, ‘post-racist’ ideology have been discharged through seismic collisions
between powerful forces of exploitative domination and the rapid unveiling of
injustices present in the lived experience of Black society for all to see. The covid
pandemic provided conditions for reflexivity but pure reflection is insufficient for
change to come.



Situational Praxis
   A Critical Praxis, as Freire teaches (1970), necessarily contains both reflection and
action. Reflection without action renders us impotent verbalists, capable of recognising
our own complicities but lacking the bravery to truly change our/the world through
action. An effective praxis is where action necessarily manifests within our own
situationally, our unique position in space and time, responsive to the opportunities
and cultural capital we possess. We can only act from where we stand, not where we
may wish to be or when ‘conditions are right’.


IASPM Journal vol.x no.x (201x)
   Pragmatic White Allyship for HE Popular Music Academics                               3


    As educators we can also be(come) de-educators. Racism has been learnt and it can
be unlearnt. Educators are well placed to problem-pose these matters of
enculturation, unveiling the shadow aspect of a broken society towards personal
transformations and emancipation? ‘The only remedy to racist discrimination is
antiracist discrimination’ (Kendi 2019). As educators, especially within popular music,
we reside in a unique position, one that comes with much possibility and potential
influence and, therefore, responsibility.

   So what, as Popular Music Academics (PMAs) in HE, can be done within our
departments, curriculums, institutions and professional fields of influence to address
this critical moment. What are our responsibilities towards our learning communities
and how should these be enacted? What are we willing to risk to transform our
learning cultures from racist to anti-racist? How could I translate the suggestions
within the Wonkhe session towards pragmatic, action based, outcomes relevant for
PMAs in HE?

   For this process of ‘translation’, I am using excerpts spoken by contributors at the
event. There is an ethical imperative to amplify Black voices. The recording of the event
can be accessed at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-dG9SfhMYe8 and excerpts are
time labelled. Full contributors’ biographies are found on the event website (WONKHE
2020). As means of accreditation I will use this coding method:


 (AD)Amatey Doku, (JA)Jason Arday, (PW)Paulette Williams, (HG)Hilary Gyebi-Ababio,
                  (MH)Marilyn Holness, (RW) Randall Whittaker



Responsibility
    Educators of all disciplines have a responsibility to act, particularly White
academics. Black academics are under-represented in UK learning communities with
latest statistics showing only 2% of academic staff as Black (HESA 18/19). Black
academics become even scarcer at Professorial level, less than 1% of UK professors.
There is a lack of presence of Black voices in academic decision making, particularly as
influence increases. White academics, of all levels of influence, have a responsibility to
speak.

  JA(30.21) ‘We have always left people of colour…to deal with issues of racism, even
 though in many cases they don’t have the power or privilege to absolve themselves of
                                   that situation.’

    HGA(1.27.07) ‘It should never be expected for Black people to come up with the
                           solutions to their own oppression’

 RW(2.04.45) ‘… leaders need to reflect on the privileges they enjoy because they are
 White and think through how they can use their privilege to address systemic racism.’

White Allyship

                                                                       www.iaspmjournal.net
4                                                                           Jason Huxtable


    In the absence of an equality of representation within our academic communities, it
is incumbent on White academics to work as allies. There are multiple interpretations
of what this could mean but, firstly, it should center on lightening the load for Black
staff and students, championing and advocating for them.

    PW(39.00) ‘Black people are leading this work and we’re tired and they’re removing
                       some of that labor for us which is amazing.’

  How to be an effective White ally? Firstly, listen to Black students and colleagues.
How can we help?

MH(1.37.06) ‘we need to know about the lived experiences of those people which these
terms refer to (BAME, Black)… (1.39.06) we need to know our students and their lived
 experiences…Who are they, what are their drivers, what are their barriers, what are
                                 their aspirations…

   Popular Music has its essence in the storytelling of personal narratives. If we want
to know our students, their lived experiences and unique situationalities, whilst also
developing their creative and technical skills, set study briefs which provoke a personal
response. Rather than writing ‘in the style of’ or ‘for industry brief’ we can encourage
students to write about themselves; write a protest song, write about ‘identity’, write
music which relates to YOU. What is Popular Music if not the communicative action of
narrative discourse? Exploring and communicating the stories of self can become
central to the process of all our students discovering, and becoming, themselves.

   Institutionally, White allies should be vocal in endorsing the expertise present in
Black colleagues and students, recommending them for new projects, opportunities
and roles. It is more pragmatic to promote existing voices as a step towards systemic
change than to tackle larger scale recruitment barriers. We can champion Black voices
from industry, using departmental budgets to invite speakers for masterclass events.
This confidence to ‘speak up’ can also be harnessed to challenge racist micro-
aggressions which compound to normalise a culture of silence.

JA(28.54) ‘when I talk about that complicity, how much are we aware of? How much do
       we turn a blind eye to these situations. When we think about this, we are
     reconceptualising what Allyship looks up. Giving up privilege is a huge part of
  acknowledging it, in recognising that there are differentials in the first place which
                      don’t reside within the idea of Meritocracy’.

   These anti-racist interventions must be reinforced through a robust reporting
structure and transparent reporting system. Goldsmiths (Akel 2019), for example, have
led the way in publishing findings that 26% of BME students ‘reported experiencing
racism from students and staff members’ and ‘an additional 43% have experienced
racialized microaggressions’. The magnitude of these findings indicates how
commonplace abuse exists within our institutions. To fail to investigate is to White-
wash. If reporting mechanisms are unclear, challenge institutional leaders.




IASPM Journal vol.x no.x (201x)
   Pragmatic White Allyship for HE Popular Music Academics                                      5


  HGA (1.54.03) ‘Institutions are talking about culturally competent cares, report and
 support mechanisms which, quite frankly, I don’t know if I’ve come across a genuinely
                        robust one in terms of reporting racism.



Decolonisation of Curriculum
   Where PMAs typically have most agency is decisions around curriculum. Often
curriculum is understood as what is taught, and it is, but also incorporates the
pedagogy which informs the method of teaching and what is not taught; the hidden
curriculum.

 AD(6.27) ‘Universities have played a critical role in the creation of race as a concept’.

JA(27.56) Universities in many ways are actually worse than some other institutions in
  terms of race equality and having penetrative interventions that really tackle and
           address racism in all of its systemic, cultural and insidious forms.

    Decolonisation of curriculum is not only important from the perspective of White
allyship but also acknowledges the University’s role in consecrating the knowledge and
philosophical underpinnings of White, colonial, imperialist thought. Black history,
struggle and suffering are not unrelated components of Popular Music - they are
central. However contested the term ‘Popular Music’ is ontologically, the impact of the
transatlantic slave trade on the evolution of Popular Music is undeniable. To what
extent are we making this history explicit and how central are the cultural contexts of
the musical objects we explore within our practice?

       HGA(1.28.54) ‘We need to expand decolonisation work outside of just EDI
     team…decolonisation in itself is a transformational process which needs to be
                          institution wide, not piece-meal’

   Decolonisation of Curriculum is not a tokenistic or ‘easy’ activity. It is insufficient to
just add extra repertoire to be studied. AD(9.42) ‘It is more than having some smiling
Black faces on your prospectus or your website’. It is a Praxis of re-examining the
biases, assumptions and historical norms which infuse what is taught and how.

   Music as a cultural constituent is present within all social events and interaction. As
PMAs we can anchor our pedagogy in a critical examination of these cultural contexts.
For example, George Floyd, AKA Big Floyd, was a proponent of Houston’s Chopped and
Screwed hip hop scene, a hip-hop subgenre developed by DJ Screw in the early 90s. An
investigation into the intersectionality between Chopped and Screwed aesthetics, hip-
hop stylistic function, Black struggle and police brutality would be an interesting
musicological route towards student’s habitually investigating their world through the
lens of musical praxis.

Course validation and periodic review processes are also a vital opportunity to re-
evaluate the ‘Whiteness’ of our curriculum and pedagogy. Does our curriculum,
pedagogy and network of subject specialists really reflect the epistemological authority

                                                                         www.iaspmjournal.net
6                                                                            Jason Huxtable


of Black voices when addressing the meanings and communication of Popular Musical
forms?

RW(2.06.21) ‘What is going wrong in your periodic review or course approval processes
                        for your curriculum still to be White?’




Access
Higher Education music departments are, unfortunately, impotent against the systemic
dismantling of publicly funded music education, music activity in schools and access to
musical experiences for all but the privileged. Institutional Access and Participation
plans can, however, be an effective way of integrating our ethical responsibility as
educators to institutional targets.

    MH (1.56.04) ‘The Access and Participation plan is crucial. The targets in the plan
             should be known and owned by everybody in the university.’

   Our powerlessness to alter the national situation can be tempered by our ability to
modify and contextualise our entry requirements, helping prospective Black students
understand how they meet those entry requirements. To what extent are we
narrowing the range of individuals who may wish to apply through rigid insistence on
forms of institutional capital reserved for those of privilege (e.g. formal music theory
qualifications, instrumental grade success and A-level attainment).

   There is an intersectionality between wealth and ethnicity and when we demand
formal qualifications, conditional on capital, we exclude. We do not ‘dumb down’ entry
requirements when we work towards new cultures of understanding where a wider
range of musical skills can be recognised as valuable, taking the particular contexts of
applicants into consideration. If we want all our students to benefit from learning
environments which reflect the diversity of our communities, an accessible music
industry and a peaceful social landscape we need to work together to address systemic
exclusion of young Black musicians.

 RW(2.09.32) ‘Being aware of racism does not fix racism. Now that the momentum of
  the Black Lives Matter protest and social media outrage has been lost, will you be
speaking out about racism? Will you still be an ally; remember you can do better, keep
                               the conversation going.’



References
Akel, S. (2019), INSIDER-OUTSIDER: The Role of Race in Shaping the Experiences of
Black and Minority Ethnic Students, [online]
https://www.gold.ac.uk/media/docs/reports/Insider-Outsider-Report-191008.pdf (last
accessed 03rd January 2021)


IASPM Journal vol.x no.x (201x)
  Pragmatic White Allyship for HE Popular Music Academics                             7


Freire, P. (1970) Pedagogy of the Oppressed. New York: Seabury Press.

HESA (2018/2019) Who’s working in HE? Personal characteristics, [online]
https://www.hesa.ac.uk/data-and-analysis/staff/working-in-he/characteristics, (last
accessed 03rd January 2021)

Kendi, I.X. (2019) How To Be An Antiracist, The Bodley Head

McVitty, D. (2020) White people must commit to antirascist action for the long term.
[online] https://wonkhe.com/blogs/white-people-must-commit-to-antiracist-action-in-
the-long-term/ (last accessed 03rd January 2021)

Wonkhe (2020) Wonkhe@Home: Black Lives Matter, [online]
https://wonkhe.com/events/wonkhe-home-black-lives-matter/ (last accessed 30th
December 2020)




                                                                   www.iaspmjournal.net
